
OK, so, this chapter focused on um science and pure science and applied science. Um, pure science is just finding out things for the greater knowledge and applied science is for a specific task in trying to figure something out. Um, the chapter also discussed um, the defintion of life. And the different aspects which fall into that category. So, things like, um, homeostasis and other characteristics that help define life in it's different categories. Um, article talked about DNA and what else was the chapter about? Mmm, yeah.

So, this chapter focused on agriculture and different perspectives on it, including Morgan, who believed in savagery lead to barbarism and um, then he believed that um people um - well, there is domestication of animals, that was one of his examples as well as pottery - the arrival of pottery. Um, and then Gordon Child believed in the neolithic revolution, which was um - it focused more on the um - I want to say the domestication of animals as well. And then, there were other opposing views to how agriculture came about. Um, such as um people's social interactions with each other and how um the surplus of food assisted in that. Um, what else? Um, the first two individuals saw this agri - the coming of agriculture as a departure of humans from nature. Um, there was also an individual who believed in symbiotic relationships, so um, the - for instance, domestication of animals is going - was um assisting both parties, as opposed to simply humans showing their dominance over other species.

Topics within public speaking and how it affects um our understanding. So, it focused on um intent means and ends and how we can be more ethical in regards to public speaking when it comes to those three aspects. Um, it talked about um, being insured, not make judgments on an individual's character. And evaluating based on what the person is actually saying. Um, it also talked about plagarism and how you need to be giving credit when it's necessary. Um, and to do that verbally, not necessarily with air quotes or um other means. Um, it talked about justice and freedom and how that kind of applies to public speaking and how you should go about crafting a speech and delivering on. Um, it also talked about the listener's perspective and how it's important to be ethical when you're listening to speeches as well as how giving them.

Talked about social psychology and social behaviors um within that. So, social situations and how those arise and how um social influence works. And our interaction with other people and the kind of influence they have on us, and we have on them. Um, it discussed social norms as well as defined culture. And then it went on to go through the ABCs, so affect behavior and cognition. Um, and defined those more in a sense of what they mean to social psychology. Um, it - the article went over the difference between mood and emotion. And, what else? It talked about risk of altruism, which is the idea of um acting a certain way towards others because you expect them - you expect to receive that same treatment, but that's not always the case, and so um, people have gotten better at kind of understanding and, you know, understanding people who are not living up to the reciprocal atruism.

So, this chapter is kind of a basic scientific chapter, maybe at the beginning of a science textbook. And the first thing it talked about was the properties of life. And there are, I think, seven properties, and, for example, one of them is reproduction. And it talks about how each of them play a role in different - in the formation of life. And then the second part was talking about taxonomy, and it was talking about kind of the hierarchy of different organisms and then the third part was talking about the different types of science. Now there's basic and applied science, and basic science is just kind of knowledge for the sake of knowledge, and then applied science is more like involving - they use the example of technology. But it's involving um, more specific questions that are applied to life, like very functional.

About um agriculture and the origins and explanations of it. And it talked about a lot of different agriculture theorists and how they believed we came from being hunters and gathers to the society we are today. And there's a lot of differing opinions on whether that was good or bad, and what triggered it. And there are some theorists that talk about um Child, for example, or Child, talks about how we are working kind of with nature. We're not parasites, like Morgan things we are, against nature. We are working with nature and becoming better producers. And he also came up with, I think it was the neologistic [ph] revolution, which talks about how, when we started controling food production, we could control - we can increase populations, and we could start communities. and that was kind of his theory of how um agriculture changed things. And it talks about the overall huge impacts of agriculture on everything, even to spirituality and time that people have in their day, the types of communities, and types of diseases that can be spread in communities because they're built. And just the widespread impact.

On the ethics of public speaking, and it started out with the pyramid of ethics. And that involved intent, means, and ends. And that is just the three main factors that you have to take into consideration when you're being a public speaker. And so the intent is just what are you intending to explain? Are you going to - is your intent to have honesty when you're explaining things? How - what is your intent of your speech? And then the means is your choices and behaviors to getting the outcomes that you want. And then your ends is the outcomes that actually happen from your speech. And then it goes into factors that play into public speaking and what you should think about as a public speaker, which is um the diversity is really important. So, different perspectives you need to take into consideration. But don't pre-judge people before you listen to what they have to say. And actually listen to them, don't just be thinking of your response, of what to say. And, also, be willing to accept the consequences, both short and long-term consequences of what you say. And that's all.

So, this article was on so-social psychology and the principles and history of it. So, it started talking out about um social situations and characteristics of people and how their situations, like if they join a cults, can influence them, sometimes more than their personal characteristics. And it gave the example of how people can join suicidal cults. And because they're influenced by the situation around them, even sane people can end up in those situations, and fall for those traps. And then it talked about cultural norms and how those are just as influential as a person's biology. And then it talked a little about the things, like uh, rel - reciprocal altruism, and it talked about the ABCs of human interactions, which were affect, like your feelings, your behaviors, and - or to your interactions. And then, gosh was C? And then there was C, and that was about cognition. And that was about your thoughts in social situations. And how all of those played a role in reciprocal altruism, which is kind of the give and take in society. And how you need to - the example they provided was when you are sick, the people around you will hopefully take care of you, and then later on you can give back to them in a different way. and that concept is why people dislike cheaters and can spot them so easily in society, because you know that they're breaking that reciprocal altruism.

Is it going? OK. Um, I read about kind of how agriculture came to be and so who some of the main like theorists regarding agriculture were. And I guess, why they thought, or like their attitudes towards it. So there is one who said it was a move towards barbarianism, then Child. Um, or Child, thorugh about it in terms of the neolithic revolution, and that we were active partners with crops and nature. Um, then there was another theorist, Ingrid, who discussed kind of - who talked about it in terms of the domestication of animals, and that - that was a main component of the push towards, or true agriculture in today's society. Um, and there was three different components of agriculture, which is domestication, tools, and something else. Not that I can think of.

So, the article was about the three levels of the ethics pyramid, as well, as - or the author also wanted to detail about the rationale for the NCA credo. And the three levels that she discussed in terms of the ethics pyramid were intentions, means, and ends. And she went into detail about how each of those are important to be aware of when evaluating public speaking. The second part of the article discussed the six components of the NCA credo. Um, essentially all of which were - and then it had a synopsis under each that basically explained why each were important. And how they could impact a listener during a public speaking engagement, and the messages that they could walk away from. Nope.

This chapter was an introduction to biology. Um first it went through a different um - the different things that um living organisms have in common, so first there - there is some sort of structure where they're organized. Um, they're also - see they're organized. They've reproduce, they um - they grow and develop a certain way. They um - they adopt to their environment, and they - adopt to their environment. They need some some sort of energy source. So, like food for people and plants need the sunlight. And, mm, energy source. And, there might have been a few more. That's all I remember. Then I went over to taxanomic system, which is a hierarchy that puts different living orgnanisms into different categories and subcategories. They found - let's see, the highest hierarchy was domain, and they found a new domain and then our needs which included the different bacteria in the world. And, hmm. And then afterwards they talked about the difference between basic science and applied science. And they said that basic sciences um pretty much just - and making new discoveries, just for science sake, you're not really looking for um a solution to a problem or anything. You're just trying to expand knowledge versus applied science is when you're trying to specifically look for a solution to a problem.

This chapter was on the different perspectives on agriculture. So, historically, and the um people viewed agriculture as a step towards progress and a step away from nature. Um, it says view has been challenged; however, um, let's see. One uh, one expert said that it - uh, the change from a hunter gatherer society to agriculture wasn't necessarily for the better because in hunter gatherer societies they actually spent less time um - less time on gathering and getting food than people in agriculture system did. And also, because of agriculture, and because of the new ponent villages, there was actually a widespread disease that came from that. Um, some other experts have - came up with different ways to view the shift into agriculture. Um, once such view was looking at agriculture as kind of a symbiotic relationship between people and natures. So, it's a challenging idea that people are getting away from nature and away from the hunter gatherer phase. So, this view says that people and n-nature work together because if they are able to benefit from that relationship equally. Um, another view saw the change to agriculture as actually a change from a trust to a ch - to dominance. S-so, as hunter gatherers people trusted nature, trusted the environment to provide them with the food sources that they needed. And um, that trust turned into dominance when they moved more towards agriculture. Because now they are um controlling the - controlling nature and environment rather than trusting that food sources will come. Um, so, some experts believed that we shoujld also look towards - or look into certain events that may have caused agriculture; for instance, they noted - they noted um the change in climate as a possibility for the change from hunter gatherer to agriculture. And also the change in population. And then, that's all I remember. OK.

This chapter was on the aspects of public speaking, so first it went through the pyramid of ethics, which includes intent, means, and ends. So, intent would be your intention before doing anything. And if that intention is coming from a good place, um, it's also possible to be unethical without - without intending to be unethical. Um, the chapter gave the example of accidental plagerism in which a person could um accidentally steal a line or information from uh a radio program that they listened to without realizing that it came from there. So it was - they didn't intend to be unethical, but it was unethical anyways. Um, and the second part of the pyramid is means. so, this is how yo ugo about doing things, like they gave the example of wanting your friend to look over your speech. Um, and you either do so by promising to do the same for them, or blackmailing them into doing it. So, it, um, gives you the same uh, result. But you're doing it two different ways. And the third part of the pyramid is the ends, and um, this could be - ends could either be ethical, unethical, or even in a weird gray area. Um, so for that gray area, there could be um, for public speaking, it could be unofficial to the person receiving the message, but not necessarily to the person sending the message. Or visa versa. Um, and then there was a portion where they talked about the ethical concepts of public speaking. So, the first big concept was being truthful. So, that's a big one. They talked about how an ethical public speaker won't - or shouldn't distort or exaggerate the information that they're talking about. And also, they should be open about their sources. And where they um took their information from. Another aspect of um ethical speaking is, let's see, [INAUDIBLE] and amerus [ph] Hm. There was six of them. I can only remember that first one. There was also um being courageous and speaking for uh fairness and justice. So, they gave the example of Martin Luther King, and um there was an aspect on hmm. I cant [INAUIDBLE] whether. OK.

The article was on so social psychology. Let's see. Um, it talked about - one second. Aspects of social psychology. It talked about where the - I remember the ABCs, it was the affect, the behaviors, and the - the cognition. So, the affect would be the feelings that, hmm. There was the almost, OK. Met - um, affect. The feelings, behaviors. For the behaviors, people would have - OK, there are social exchanges, and then they would be positive co - positive benefits in which you received something positive from social exchanges, like good feelings or even traded goods. And then there'd be negative costs, like frustrations from, um - from arguments. So, those would be the social costs, or the negative costs. Um, there would be social altruism, would be - is the idea that you give to a certain individual, like giving them support that they need. With the idea that it will come back to you when you need it to. then, I can't remember all - was in the very beginning. Mm. All I remember. Stop.

Section started with ah, discussing basic biology and um, the basic functions of life. Um, it gave the virus as an example of um not being um uh, living uh, a technical living cell. Um, I can't remember what the first paragraph was. I only remember pieces of it. OK, well, at the bottom page um discussed uh, um, both uh, basic and applied, and the differences between the two. And um how many scientists have said that um basic isn't really necessary. Um, and that many of the things we've learned, such as with the penicillin vaccine have come from accidents. Um, and uh, but it is necessary to have the basic understanding in order to um just have a general knowledge and expand on that knowledge, which makes the applied um capable um to apply all the basic knowledge and to something that um that will actually continue to expand our technology. And just our knowledge in general. Um, the middle segment talked about um, an atom being the smalled fundamental um piece of life. And then molecules are two more atoms, um. Tissues being a grouping of cells. Um, organs being groups of tissues. Um, and then organisms being groups of uh - groups of tissues working together. OK.

15,000 years ago um we shifted from hunter gatherer societies to agricultural societies. Uh, the anthropologist, Lewis Henry Morgan, um stated this as the time of savagery shifting to barbarism.  Agriculture can be broken down into three components - domestication, which is the relationship between humans and plants and animals. Technology, which is the tools used. And community, which is the way that the people view the landscape, not only physicially change it, but also view it as a whole.

OK, the beginning of the section talked about the ethics pyramid, which includes intention, means, and ends. Which was developed by Tilly. And the intention has to do with the um - the driver, the intent behind the message this is wanting to be conveyed. The means is the behavior or the tools that um the speaker um uses to get their um ideas across, and the end is the outcome from the behavior or tools. Um, um, then the next section talked about the um NCA adopting the credo of ethical communications. In 1999, I believe. Um, and it discussed um, the ethics of behind being honest, and not manipulating the information, um that you have, being honest about, where it comes from. Uh, not plagarizing any of the information, rewording it, and describing it in your own way. Um, also, about caring about your message and your audience. Um, and taking responsibility for the messages that you spread and how it is interpreted, although not necessarily responsible for um how someone acts. Um, or how they would take that message, but being aware of um the way you spread the knowledge that you have and how people could potentially react to it.

Uh, in public speaking there is an ethics pyramid consisting of intent, means, and ends. Means are the ways in which you go about achieving your desired outcome, and ends are those outcomes. Um, when citing information, you always want to be honest about it, and honest about where you got it. And fully disclose where you got it. Um.

This essay discussed um defining social psychology. Um, social psychology being the study of the dynamic relationship between individuals and the people they interact with. Um, discussed um social interaction, um, the people and events um that come into contact with the individual. And - it's already gone. Um, social norms being the collective um - collective, agreeable attributes of the group of people. Um, social su - psychology refers um to the ABCs - the affect, behavior, and cognition. The affect being the feelings we have. Behavior being the reaction or the um act. And the cognition being the um thought. Um, and the affect gave a little bit more information, um discussing the differences between um, mood and emotion. Mood being a longer kind of positive or negative um reaction or just general feeling. And the emotion being ah, more of a brief, um, and uh, brief shift um that usually is in relation to something new. Um, on the bottom of the essay discussed um, social altruism. And kind of the idea of sharing or doing something for someone else. Um, with the intention that then that person will owe you the uh, same involvement or um activity that you gave to them at a later time, and it's um, very easy for people to um pay attention to that, and uh, react very negatively if that's kind of um, not reciprocated.

So, this reading was about biology. And um there are eight characteristics of all living organisms. And um, I'm going to try to remember. But they are order, which is like the um, the cellular complexity of an organism. Um, response to stimuli, so if - like for example, um plants will reach towards the sun. Um, reproduction, homeostasis, which is being able to um keep like internal um, like temperature.  Like how humans sweat when it's hot. You're trying to regulate - oh, regulation is another one, I think. Um, growth and development. So, each living thing grows and develops in a certain way. Um, that's all I can remember. There are eight of those. And then there's um, and every living thing is made up of like atoms and molecules and has cells and organelles [ph], and organs and things like that. And then, um, there are eight parts to the taxonomic system. And they are species, genus - um, species, genus, order, filum [ph], class. Um, kingdom and domain. I can't remember what the other one is. Um, and then it talked about uh, basic sciences versus applied science and basic science is basically just um, facts, like knowledge for the sake of knowledge. Um, and then applied science is sort of um the science for application. So, uh, the science you need to cure a disease. And, um, some scientists think that basic science is useless because we need all science to, you know, for application. Um, but you kind of need basic science in order to get to applied science.

OK, so this passage was about agriculture. And the early perspectives of agriculture, and then the uh, perspectives that challenge those early perspectives. Um, and other possible ideas for how agriculture came to be. So, the early perspectives were Morgan and Child. Morgan said that humans - with agriculture, humans are putting themselves outside of nature. Um, and then Child um referred to um this change to agriculture from a hunter-gatherer lifestyle to um an agricultural lifestyle. He referred to that as a neolithic revolution and he said that um this active control of um - yeah, this active control is leading to um an increase in population basically. Um, and then this increase in population is um leading to more developed um settlements. Then the later perspectives that challenged the earlier ones were um, forgot the first guy's name. And there's Ingold [ph], who believed in - oh, the first guy, whose name I don't remember, believed in a symbiotic relationship. Um, I guess between people and their crops. And then the um Ingold believed in kind of domination with humans. Um, and then the lat guy, Sullens [ph] - what did Sullens believe? Um, I can't remember what Sullens believed either. And then later so that there are three components to agriculture, and they are um, something, technology and something else that I can't remember now. And then some external factors that might have led to agriculture are climate change, and um, maybe increase in population? I can't remember.

OK, so this reading was about ethics. And the ethics period and - or, pyramid, and um, the NCA credo. So, the ethics pyramid consists of intent, means, and ends. And for all three of these things, there's a spectrum. So, for intent, you could be um, unintentional, like you could say something mean unintentionally or unethical unintentionally. Um, you might say it intentionally. Um, so, um, yeah, there is kind of a scale there. And then for means, that's um, how you get to the desired outcome. Um, and for that, there's also a spectrum. So you can, if you're asking for a favor from someone, you can say, OK, well, I'll do you a favor next week, or something. And then, as opposed to, oh, if you don't do me this favor, um, I'll tell on you about something. Um, and then ends, so that's the desired outcome that you want. And something to consider with that is um, and obviously that can be ethical or unethical. Um, and something to consider about that is it might be um - the ends might be good for you, but not for the receiver. And vice versa. Or it might be good for both of you or bad for both of you. So, there are two people involved in that. And then the credo, that was created by the government. Um, was designed to help kind of start a discussion about ethics. Um, and this particular reading talked about it in regards to public speaking. And so this credo basically talks about like um, citing your sources and not plagarizing, and being honest with your information. Um, not exaggerating. Um, and not distorting any of the information. Um, and then as far as the listeners go, don't, you know, try to come up with a rebuttal while you're listening to somebody just because what they're saying is against what you believe in necessarily. You want to be an open listener. Um, and if you - you want to stand up to injustice and inequality because that's how we move forward as a society. And, um, yeah, cite your sources, don't plagarize. There's something else, that I forgot. But, yeah.

So, um, in short, I just read an excerpt from a textbook about social psychology and how people are influenced by those around them. Um, and sometimes it's um without really thinking about it. Like, for example, sometimes - the example that the textbook excerpt gave was that you um learn to stop at a stop sign and so if you're in a deserted area, and you come to a stop sign, you're likely to stop at that stop sign. Um, even though nobody's around, just because you've developed um that like social - internal social, I guess, belief. Um, and how um people are likely to be affected by how they're feeling and what they believe about people and like um judgments that they make about people and um let's see, what else there was. I can't remember. Um. Yeah.

Um, so, the first um introduction of this piece of information is what biology essentially is, which is the study of - uh, it's the science of life. And um, it starts out by discussing the basic functions and key characteristics of biology. And give - by giving like one-liners of each. For example, it starts off with border, which is like the first function. Discussing the hierarchy that exists within biology, from single atom al the way up to ecosystems. Um, and then the second one would be response to stimuli, uh, which would include things like when a plant um shifts to face the sunlight. Or, um, photosynthesis, and then things like adaptability. Which includes uh changing and adapting certain characteristics of animals and species in certain environments, and how that has been critical in evolution, as wel as things like, you know, reproduction, when our DNA is passed on. And is essential for the survival of species, and just, you know, life in general. Any living org-organism. Um, so the first half of the piece talks about that information. And then it goes into discussing the hierarchy of um the construction of living organisms, starting with the atom, which is the smallest unit, to molecules and then kind of growing bigger to tissues and organs and their functions in the body and how single cellular organisms differ from multicellular organisms, um, in that multicellular organisms. Um, have multiple - have multiple cells within them, and you still have the different function. Um, which obviously changes the biology of the organism. Um, and that goes into talking about eventually the ecosystems, that there's tissued organs and then uh, slowly leads up to like the over - overview of, you know, all species. that includes the environment and how they survive. Um, so that - so that explores like the hierarchy. And then it talks about um, yeah, biology as a study. So, basic science and applied science, and the dichotomy of having two types of studies within one subject. So, basic science would include honing on basic theories. And hypotheses and uh, just fundamental really walks of science and biology specifically. And then, um, applied science would be how that basic science is pretty much used to solve real world problems. Um, and one of the examples given was, for example, DNA, um and basic science  would establish what DNA is, and it's significance in passing down genetic traits. Um, and then applied science would explore how DNA can be used to identify paternity. And we use it in crime scenes for uh, you know, figuring out um solutions, basically. So, yeah.

What's a free recall? So, you want me to talk to it? Oh. Um, so, it was talking about the consturction of agriculture, um, in society. And whether that's progress or it's um constructed. Oh, God, I didn't expect this. OK. Um, so it starts off discussing the origin of like uh historical and anthropological concepts by different studies that have been conducted. That compare hunter gatherers with um agricultural behavior and practices, and then there was a part that divided agriculture into three different cra - like components. One being comme - community technology and domestication. and the three kind of summarize the practices of agriculture. Um, but it's introduced later in the reading as a way to, I think sum up what is being set up. then agriculture is also talked about as a process. And how explanations are being sought out for why agriculture came about as a way to systemically take over nature, so that attitude towards nature by humans. Um, so, whether um, agriculture is - was brought about as a way for genes to dominate nature and to control it in some way, shape, or form. Um, and there were con - contrasting studies that showed um, that - what was it? Yeah, hunger gatherers in fact had better food habits and had - or spent less time um searching for food. than horticulturists. Which was interesting. That OK?

OK, so the chapter that I just read, um, was about ethics of communication. And um, the - the chapter starts off by talking about um, uh, a theory, or research conducted by a professor, who's last name is Tony and first name, I do not recall. But she basically has outlined three key ways of thinking about the ethics. Uh, the first one being intent, means, and end. Um, and intent basically pertains to the intent of both the speaker and the receiver, and whether they are approaching the text, or whatever they're communicating, with honesty and integrity. And how they are thinking about it. Um, and she - she basically discusses how uh, ah, intent could come from the person giving - communicating. So, whether a person is intending to convey a persuasive message, or informational message, um, and then whether the intent of the receiver is to actually receive that informaiton or not. Um, she also presents um a blind spot in that theory of um, some ethical dilemmas being unintentional. For example, in certain plagarism situations, whereby the intent of a person is not to be unethical, but uh, there is a subconscious reiteration of ideals that may not be completely credited. Which is also considered unethical in the grand scheme of things. Um, means are basically the tools, um, that have a certain outcome. Um, that tie in with intent obviously. Um, and means could, you know, include ways of speaking, and you know, ethics of means would include um, exaggeration. And leaving out certain details and omitting certain information, and how that - how people get to an expected outcome. Um, and the outcome is obivously what happens as a result of means. Um. which, you iknow, could like be - is basically determined by intent and means. And the efficality that goes into those two for the mean - the outcome to be a certain way. However, there are situations where outcomes could be unethical without the intention or the means being unethical. Which has happened, obviously. Um, the chapter also talks about the National Communication Association's credo fo ethical communication. That was introduced in 1999, which basically outlines certain um, details and questions, and ways of approaching ethicality and communication, that communicators need to think about, whether it's public speakers or, uh, you know, just creators of media. Um, and there are three questions that Tony outlines, that are crucial in asking ourselves, before deciding whether something is ethical. Um, the first one is have we consulted others, um, about the ethical dilemma and heard their perspective. Um, the second is, have we consulted known codes of ethics? So, there are studies and patterns and trends that show certain behaviors, whether theyr'e ehtical or not, and it's important to basically consult those as well. Um, and the third one is, I think, I may be wrong, but whether um a diverse perspectives - whether diverse perspectives have been heard. Um, but I have a feeling that that's not it. But, yeah. Um, and then there is a lot of - so part of the NCA credo of ethics talks about, you know, just there's things like social justice movements that have been originated as a result of believing and - and having passion and - and being able to enunciate and speak publically about certain issues. Um, with, you know, a good, strong, honest, ethical framework, as well as taking responsibility for the actions and the consequences of certain public speaking and certain ideals that have been, you know, propogated. Um, the chapter also discusses the importance of hearing different perspectives in, when it comes to discussing ideas and - and points of communication, because it is often difficult uh, to hear things that you like may disagree with. And judge speakers based on, you know, surface things like their appearance before they even begin speaking. and these are um, these are, I guess, rules, and uh, suggestions by the NCA credo to get public speakers to also be better listeners in judging your own judgments of other people, which is crucial in analyzing whether certain things are ethical. But, yeah, the chapter basically concludes by saying that public communicators need to take responsibility for the long-term and short-term um affects of their actions and their words. And they should be careful about, you know, exaggerating or omitting details which happens a lot. So, yeah.

So, this passage discussed um the progression of agriculture. And they begun by - it was - it started by talking about how um the early archeologists and anthropologists believed that agriculture was started to um switch from savagery to more barbarianism. Um, and to kind of change from - or more like remove themselves from nature, and um become better than nature. Um, and then - and there was the neolithic revolution, um, which discussed the um let's see - that was essentially us becoming in control of the plants and the animals so that we could use them as our food. And then there is another anthropologist who discussed um that we moved from a trusting relationship to one of dominance. So, that's us um being in control of the animals and the food so that we can use them to our benefit. Um, but then it was also discussed that we have a symbiotic relationship between humans and the plants and the animals. Um, so that suggests that humans are taking care of the plants and the animals, but then the plants and animals are also providing the humans with nutrition. Um, then, moving forward a little bit, there were other archeologists and anthropologists who discussed um let's see. They discussed that oy vay, um - they discussed the differences in farming versus argri - or farming versus the hunter gatherers society, and were discussing how it kind of moved from hunter gatherer to farmer. Um, but that looking back a lot of the farming villages were actually less healthy than the hunter gatherer societies, um because they lived cose together, which was conducive for disease to spread throughout the village. Um, but that this earlier hunter gatherer society, it started as being um more generalized and they relied really on the sparse resources. So it became really competitive and it didn't allow for populations to grow. And so they suggested that um these generalized hunter gathers kind of evolved into being more specialized um expert hunter gatherers that would rely on more um, more beneficial resources, such as salmon and nuts and things that would last them a while, and that they turned the competitiveness which previously had stunted population growth into more of a community. Um, kind of having - doing this competitively finding of food and resources, but doing it in a manner where everybody can benefit, and so they would have these big feasts. Um, and this was helpful in that it supported larger populations. Um, and then the anthropologists suggest that this kind of turned into the agriculture. So, creating their own food to help better supplement the population. Um, now see, the um wow. What else happened in there? I think that's all I can remember right now.

After I was talking about ethics and public speaking, and it began by discussing the ethics pyramid, which includes intent, means, and ends. And intent is essentially that the intent of revealing the information, um, and it's thought that before you begin public speaking, you can um kind of find the consensus of what your listeners feel is ethical before you go into the topic, or lots of times, the institutions will have guidelines for you to follow. Um, sometimes intent can be unintentional. Um, so, sometimes you can do maladaptive um things unintentionally. Like plagarism, if you were to quote somebody, but forget to give them credit. That would be unintentional plagarism. Um, then your means is how you get to the outcome. So, any tools or behaviors. And this can be good or bad, um means. And the good means is um for instance, repaying somebody a favor if they help you. Um, but the bad means would be more or less coercing somebody to help you. Um, while are both are means to an end, they definitely have different um ethics behind them.  And then the ends are the outcomes, the desired outcomes that you want. Um, and then they talked about um the credo um put forth by National Communication Association, and how, when discussing ethics, and when public speaking, you really need to um fall back on the fundamentals of honesty and truth. Um, and a reason. And so, having - and understanding that you're being honest with your audience, um, because oftentimes public speakers really want to make that connection, so they tend to kind of expand on the truth a little bit. And this can falsify the informaiton. And so they encourage, as a part of their credo and principles to remain honest. Um, and give credit where credit's due. Um, they also discussed that it's important to have diversity, so that - because diversity gives somebody a - a fuller view of information instead of just having one single view or opinion. Um, it was also discussed that there's ethics for the listener, that oftentimes listeners just tend to sit back and agree with the speaker. But it's important that we, as listeners, um kind of think for ourselves and not just assume that everything being told to us is the truth. But to actually think um critically about what's being said, and to come up with our own opinions about it. Um, it was also discussed in one of the principles, to take ownership of what you say, um, and understand the consequences both short-term and long-term um for the things that you say. So.

The chapter discussed essentially the social situation and the so-social situation is how people interact with others. And those are their relationships in their lives. Um, and that that really influences who they are as a person, which would be the social influence. Um, social influence has a stronger um determinant in somebody's behavior, um than their personality does. Um, these build into um what social norms are for a group of individuals which also lead to the cultural norms. Cultural norms are something that binds people together who live in a certain area or um have the same beliefs, um, and they all kind of have the social norm in how they interact with other people as well, not just within their culture, but without - with the people who are not in their culture. Um, for instance, a lot of the ways that we, as Americans, interact, are much different than other cultural um groups interact with individuals such as making direct eye contact. A lot of other cultures don't do that. Um, or feel that it's a sign of um - not insecurity, but just - not what we interpret that behavior being. And so this really impacts the way that individuals interact with each other, especially since being in America, we're kind of the melting pot of cultures. And we interact with a lot of different cultures on a daily basis. Or individuals from different cultures on a daily basis. And so, it's important to know how they may differ from us and what may be seem - what may be um deemed as respectful, um, and appropriate when interacting with them. And then, this leads to, what was that? Oh, um, like social cognition and behaviors such as emotions and moods and how those form who you are as a person as well. There was discussion about the difference between moods and emotions, which i thought was interesting. Where the moods are the positive and negative feelings that you feel, and they kind of happen consistently throughout the day. Whereas, the um emotions are more intense. And that you feel those connected with really big events happening in your life. Um, so, yeah.

Biology is the study of life and living organisms. Virology is the studyof viruses specifically. Um, 130-200 million years ago mammals, birds, and flowers began to exist. Whereas, humans didn't start existing until about 2.5 million years ago. And anatomically modern humans didn't start existing or evolving until around 200,000 years ago. Um, viruses are not considered to be living organisms, because they are not made of cells. Uh, there are two types of cells, prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Prokaryotes are generally single-celled organisms that lack organelles and nuclei; whereas, eukaryotes do have organelles and a nuclei. Mm. Basic science is basically seeking out knowledge just for the sake of it. Whereas, applied science is using science to resolve first world problems. 

Social psychology is based on affect, behavior and cognition. Um, affect has to do with feelings, such as chema or atittude. Schema is the information that you receive about somebody. For example, so-and-so is a nice person. And attitude is your liking or disliking of that person or group. For example, I like so-and-so because they are a nice person. Behavior, uh, has to do with social, or is based off of social reward and social cost. Social reward is the positive outcomes of your behavior, or somebody's behavior and social cost is the negative outcomes. Cognition has to do with thought. Um. Social psychology also has to do a lot with social influence and who you're surrounded by each day. And, that social influence can create social norms within a culture. Such as spatial relationships with people, and different communication styles.

So, this chapter talked about biology and the kind of origin of biology. How it was used to um study life and living things. And it talked about eight key characteristics that a living thing - all living things have. And so it was like um men - like um energy and metabolism, reproduction. How they - living things reproduced to produce things that look like them and have the same DNA. Um, the adaptation and how um they can - living things can adapt to get their needs met. Um, the idea of like homeostasis and kind of regulating themselves, um, and that they're all highly organized, um, structures that have a lot of working parts. And then it went on to talk about the organization of um - the organization of living things, um, from the smallest unit of a living thing - the atom, all the way up to um, in like an ecosystem where uh, different populations of um living things are living together. Um, and they talked about how the forest is an ecosystem with the flowers and the trees and the animals. Um, and how they kind of all live together. Um, and then it talked about the 18th century and Linaes [ph], and how it kind of developed this classification system. Um, and then it ended with talking about the difference between basic and applied science. Basic science being um kind of like the foundational um science that isn't - is used just to um gain an understanding of something. Um, whereas, applied science is used to answer a specific question or solve a specific problem. And um, there's some debate about which one is more valuable. Um, but ultimately it seemed that both were dependent on each other, so, or, that is definitely applied science is dependent on basic science because you didn't have that foundational basic understanding of how things worked. Um, there wouldn't necessarily be a way to um answer - use science to answer applied questions. And, I think that's it. 

The chapter, um, outlined some of the theories about the beginning of agriculture. So it started with some um more dated theories that talked about um kind of these savage hunter gatherer cultures that then um - and viewed agriculture as this advancement in technology. Um, or just an advancement in humanity. And um, then later theories suggest that maybe it wasn't the humanity advancing and becoming um, more developed inherently, but that maybe it was a combination of many factors, including climate change and population pressure. And um other theories suggest that perhaps um, it - or agriculture doesn't even signal necessarily a better quality of life, or a better um, more advanced humanity, but that these hunter gatherer populations actually experienced um greater ti - greater leisure time and less disease. Um, and then um there was kind of three main things that were - factors that were mentioned in the development of agriculture, which was domes - domestication, or how humans interacted with nature and other humans. Um, that changed, and then technology. So, the advent of pottery or I guess knives, and just different things that could be used for um food preparation and different food practices. And then community. So, how people related to one another and related to the land and um became owners of land and how that all worked together.

So the passage talked about um the ethical pyramid. Um, that was created and ultimately we should have a balance between all three of these to be truly ethical. But it had to do with intention. Um, which is um, should be - ultimately should be honest and um you can use code of ethics or um conversations with other people to decide if behavior is ethical. But you should have um your behavior - y-you should have ethical intentions behind your behavior. And then means was the next part of the pyramid. And that was how - what actions - if your actions um are ethical. So, um, all of these - all the parts of the pyramid could have unethical or ethical sides, but um, means would be like your actions to obtain, or to get a certain result. Um, and the result would be the end. Or ends. Um, and that would - you want to look at if um - the ends could be good for the source or the receiver, or both. So, you have to look at and see if um what the ends was. I f you would be OK with the ends if it happened to you, and use that as kind of a way to judge um the ethicacy behind it. Eth - ethicalness. Um, and then, the NCO credo has to do with defining kind of prinicples of ethical communication. And there were six of them. Um, it had to do with expressing, communicating honestly. Um, and citing your sources, not plagarizing, and being aware of biases in your sources. And then being um, a respectful listener. so, um while you're communicating, if uh, an issue of dis - that you don't agree with comes up, you should really focus on um not trying to come up with a counter-argument, but listen respectfully and being informed. Um, there was one that had to do with being courageous, so communicating about issues of inequality or injustice. Um, thre was one that had to do with caring about your audience and um that would be a way to be persuasive is um thinking about your audience needs, and knowing your audience. And there are two more. But I don't remember them.

The study of um people and their relationships with others. Um, this piece of information starts out by talking about how most people gravitate towards social psychology. Um, and how it affects the behavior, not just of individuals, but of groups of people. Um, and it affects cultural dialogue and cultural uh, habits over time. Um, so it talks about how social structures and behaviors lead to social norms. So the formation of certain habitual patterns as a result of interaction with other people, as well as, preconceived ideas, the knowledge about groups and information. Um, what - there are three types of - there are three categories that you can divide social psychology and study, which were, the affect, which are the feelings and uh, the other two I can't remember. But I do remember talking - the now - or the piece of information talking about um schema and atittude. Because schema refers to information that you know about other people, and attitude refers to your personal experience and your feelings. Which indirectly affects the way that you view culture. Um, and how a culture is um a group of people who embody certain habits and practices as a result of social interaction and their core values differ. Um, for example, little traits like the way that certain cultures associate with time. Or the relationship with, you know, space. Um, and their interactions with one another tend to differ, based on geographical and historical context. Um, then there's also much talk about  the internalization of certain habits, especially when it comes to children and parents, and how um it's very easy for children to internalize the values and opinions as well as information given by their elders or their parents. Um, which in turn leads to a contuation of social um - social psychology basically. Un, and then, there's is this concept of um, oh, and due to immigration and technology and this flow of different cultures, it's more now  - now more important than ever to uh, study and understand social behavior. Um, as more people come in contact with each other who may or may not have the same experiences. Um, and then towards the end, there's talk of reciprocal altruism. Which basically means you do something for somebody in the hopes that they will return the favor at some point or another. Um, and the fault - and, you know, the pitfalls of that ideology in um being idealistic.  So, yeah.

So, this reading was about biology, and intro biology. And they discussed a few different topics. They began by talking about life and what is incorporated in um the meaning of life, I guess. Or what creates life. Um, and there were eight different things um that help categorize living organisms and un they included, let's see, reproduction, so the ability to um reproduce your DNA and pass it on to an offspring. They talked about adaptation, so essentially survival of the fittest. So, adapting to your surroundings and making sure that you're able to survive. Um, there's discussion of thermoregulation, so um essentially your body temperature um to help with the climate that you live in. Um, there was discussion of hmm, uh, multi-cellular organisms are better than single cellular organisms, so it's kind of that hierarchy um that the more complex is higher on the hierarchy than the less complex. Um, that's all I'm remembering from that portion. Um, then they talked about taxonomy and the order. So, taxonomy is um a hierarchical order of how things are categorized. And it begins with somewhere along the lines of species and organisms moving up to like genus and families and order and class. Um, kingdom and domain.  Um, and this is just how they uh specify the different organisms. And then, they discussed the difference between basic and applied science. And basic science discuss is essentially like learning something for knowledge's sake. And that's all basic is, but this can turn into applied science. Um, but not necessarily. And then applied science is um applying the science and your knowledge to help solve real life problems.

The essay contained three parts. The first part was around the basic conditions, um, of life. The second part was around the hierarchical taxonomy system. And then the last part was around basic and applied science and the difference between the two and different applications. Um, the first part talked about, um, what pieces made up this idea of life or what characteristics all life shared. Um, they included order, sensitivity or response to stimuli, um, reproduction, growth and development, regulation, homeostasis, um, and energy processing. I'm missing one in there. Um, and then it talked about the, um, different I guess like levels, um, that made up organisms, so we started with atoms and then molecules, um, moving up to cells and organelles and then larger organs and organ systems and organisms, um, and then populations and ecosystems, and really talked about how each one fit within the other. Um, and when looking at cells, there's a designation there between single-cell organisms and multi-cell organisms. Um. And then the next part looked at the hierarchical taxonomy system, and, um, back when it was developed, it was done  it was  the objective was to group different species, um, by their genus. The current hierarchical taxonomy system has eight different levels, um, but the main three, while I do not remember their names, look around, divided between bacteria, um, cells without nuclei, and then cells with nuclei. And then the final part of the essay looked at the difference between basic science and applied science. Basic science is this idea that perpetrating scientific knowledge, um, without a particular short-term or long-term purpose in mind, rather than just the continuing spread of knowledge. Um, and then the counter to that would be  or not counter, but the other part would be applied science, um, which looks really at using science to solve real-world problems. Um, there's kind of a debate going on around, um, if basic science is useful at all in being taught, um, but one major argument is that basic science knowledge is actually necessary to move towards applied science knowledge. Uh, yeah.

The essay is structured in two parts. The first part is looking at three parts of a pyramid, um, around ethical communication, and the second part is around the NCA, um, creed or code for ethical behavior and communication. The first part, um, breaks it down into three parts of the pyramid, the first being intent, the second being means, the third being ends, and provides strategies around how to evaluate one's, um, public speaking around those three aspects. Um, when looking at the intent, it is important to discuss the behavior and intent with other people to try to crowdsource and ensure that the behavior is in line with what other people think is ethical or not ethical. When looking at means, it talked about there's different ways that we achieve our objectives, and some can be ethical and others can be unethical, even if the outcomes are the same. And again, it is important to kind of line that up with an established code of ethics or what an accepted popular opinion around what is ethical may be. The last part is the ends, and it's important to know that the ends may be ethical for the source and not the receiver, or the receiver and not the source, and it's really important to balance those and be aware and try to ensure that it is  they are positive for both the source and the receiver. Um, the second part of the essay was around the NCA, I don't know if it was a creed or a code for ethical communication, and that had various different tenets. Um, in layman's terms, the first one was around being honest and truthful. The  OK, I might go out of order here, but other ones included ensuring a caring environment, so it's a two-pronged approach of like caring about the audience and understanding the audience that you're communicating with, being open to dissent or counter-arguments, being transparent about where the information comes from. That one is using  ensuring  and that kind of has two parts. You wanna make sure that you're talking about sources and like identifying potential sources of bias, and then on the other end you're making sure that you're not engaging in behaviors that are plagiarism. Um. And I think  oh, taking responsibility for the short-term and long-term consequences of, um, what the public speaking may result in.

This chapter was about biology, and it started with talking about the eight, um, categories of biology and organisms, and then it moved into talking about, um, oh, the order of things from smallest to greatest, so starting with like atoms and molecules and then moving on to ecosystems, or ecosystems being the last thing, but just the order for how, um, how organisms are organized. And then at the end, it was talking about basic biology  um, let's see  versus a different one. And one of them was looking at how you study things just to study it and the other one is like studying and, um, doing experiments for a reason. Might be financial gains or, um solving a cure or doing something like that.

Talking about them? Oh, OK. It was talking about the development of agriculture and how there were two theories initially from hundreds of years ago; 1800s, I think. They were saying that it was the separation from man and nature and that hunter/gatherers were barbaric, and so we were progressing by becoming  um, by developing agriculture, but more recent theories have disputed that and said that it's not a separation from man and nature and it doesn't mean that hunter/gatherers were barbaric, that they were actually more effective in providing food than the initial agriculturists were. And, um, they're still trying to determine an exact reason why we switched to develop agriculture. There are other theories now, like climate change and developing more of a community, and then at the end it was talking about the definitions. Um, so community was one of them, tools, and domestication, and those were some of the changes that were made. So animals and plants became domesticated, meaning they were kind of kept, um, or moved from an original location, and there was the development of tools for agriculture, and communities were centered around that and they like made landscape and things for that. And there was something else. Um. Oh, another theory more recently was that, uh, I think the  the shift from hunter/gatherer was that people, the more advanced hunter/gatherers could collect food and kinda use it to bribe people and, um, kinda gain power that way, so the shift to doing more agricultural, um, type of farming would eliminate that sort of power.

OK, so this chapter was about ethics and public speaking, and it started out talking about the ethics pyramid that had intent, means, and ends, and the intent is what the speaker is intending to  or of ethics, what you're intending to portray, the means is the tools you use to get to that desired outcome, and the ends is the desired outcome. And then it went into the NCA's six principles for ethics and just talking about what a speaker should consider and do when they are speaking to be the most ethical, so being aware of potential consequences and, um, citing their sources and quotes, making sure that all sources are known to the audience, not manipulating the audience in any way, being honest, and those things. And it reminded me of politics.

  social psychology, and it was talking about how, um, social psychology is how we interact with other people and how they influence us. And now I'm blanking on the first few terms. There's, um  in social psychology there is the ABCs, and that's Affect, Behavior, and Cognition. And affect is how you are on the daily basis and if you're happy or sad, but then within that there's moods, which you can kinda fluctuate, and then there is emotions, which are really brief and intense. And then in behavior, um, this is where there was  let's see, social  something altruism, something. So within behavior, it's how you're interacting with other people, but it was talking about how we expect certain things from certain people and how you behave towards others. So like if you were sick, you expect people to take care of you because you would take care of them. And then, uh, cognition is talking about social cognition, which kinda separates us from animals because we have a cerebral cortex. And with social cognition, we can know how to interact with certain people in certain situations, and there's different schemas, so we know like in that situation, that's how we should act. And then, um, what's the other one? There was another definition within that. Schemas. And let's see. It was talking about at the beginning  trying to remember what it was saying  that it was like we had social support or something like that, so you feel  yeah, so you get like social validation from other people, and that's how you can feel good about yourself. And that's  hmm, let's see. Then I forget.

  I read was about, um, diversity of life on earth. Um, uh, binomial nomenclature. Um, applied science versus basic science. Um, things like cells; eukaryotic, prokaryotic. Um, molecules, atoms, cells, that kind of stuff. We good?

Is it going? OK. So what I read about was, um, the history of agriculture and how, um, Morgan and Childs seem to think that, um, agriculture was seen as more, um, barbaric. And then  or working with nature. Yes, working with nature. And how, um, the other guy thought that it was, um, more barbaric and that you should be working  not be working against nature. Something like that.

So what I read about was ethics and public speaking. Um, in public speaking there are three aspects: intent, means, and ends. Um, and when you're public speaking, it's important to ask yourself if it follows the code of ethics. Um. When you are giving a speech, it's important to, um, to be mindful of the diversity of your crowd. Um, and, um, um, uh, not to plagiarize any other's words. Um. And then listeners should not, um, be too quick to judge their, um, opinions of the speeches based on what they've heard from other people. And.

  started out talking about, uh, social influence and how social situations affect like social influence, so pretty much the people around you largely affect, uh, the inf  like, your social influence, I guess; that they are your social influence. And then it talked about the ABCs, which it didn't really come back to much, but it was like Behavior, Cognition, something; I can't remember the A. And then talked about your  like, how you judge others, so like schemas, attitudes. And then that's pretty much it.

  about different elements of life, um, like adaptation, stimuli, um, how they get their energy, and, um, different aspects like that. Um, it also broke up all living things into three basic domains: uh, eukaryotic cells, bacteria, and archaea. And eukaryotic cells  and they also talked about, um, more complex cells that have membrane-bound organelles and then also more simplistic cells, um, like, uh, prokaryotes that, uh, didn't have, um, membrane-bound organelles and how a lot of viruses and bacteria  well, viruses mainly  uh, can't live on their own or reproduce without invading a host cell, because they don't have the, um, necessarily  necessary equipment themselves to reproduce and, um, even in some cases metabolize. Um, and so it was just basically going in the beginning, talking about the different aspects, like I say, adaptation, reproduction, um, how they get energy, uh, and then also just their basic DNA and how DNA, deoxyribonucleic acid, is basically  well, it didn't say this, but it's basically the blueprint for, um, all living structures. And then it also talked about, um, at the end applied sciences versus, uh, hard sciences. Excuse me. And how  well, I don't know if it used the term hard sciences, but, um, what I mean by hard sciences is it was talking about, um, just observing the world and trying to understand, um, the way things interact just for the sake of it, um, kind of like when we try to discover, well, what's the shape of DNA and things like that. Doesn't necessarily have any sort of application, it's just knowledge for knowledge's sake. Um, then it also talked about applied sciences, which is basically, um, trying to solve a problem. And, um, and just how the different types of sciences are valued, um, how a lot of people think that, well, the hard sciences or the  like I say, I forget the term  um, is kind of useless because it's not really solving anything. But then it also made the argument that, well, without that basic knowledge about  of DNA, for example, we wouldn't have, uh, been able to apply that knowledge to, say, paternal tests or, um, you know, DNA analysis at crime scenes. And then in the middle of the chapter, which I'm just now remembering, um, it was talking about, uh, just taxonomy and how you classify living things and how, um, you know, the beginning  the first  like, so every living organism has two names associated with it. The first one is their genus name and the second one is their species name. And, um, and the first one's capitalized, the second one isn't, and it's italicized when it's printed. And then it was also talking about, um, the hierarchy of living things and how you have genus and, um, now I forget the order, but genus, phylum, species, and you have order and, um, all that stuff in there in between. But, um, yeah. I feel like I remember this one a lot better just because I had  I already had previous knowledge of it. I don't feel like any of the information presented was new, so it's just a matter of trying to figure out what's the main points to share, I guess.

This chapter was on agriculture, and, um, it talked about different theories of agriculture and, um, kind of the progression of it and how, um, you know, historically we were hunter and gatherer societies. And, um, uh, within those societies there are also subgroups, uh, ones that, you know, the resources were a little bit more scarce, so their population depended on, um  I guess the size of their population depended on what their resources were, whereas other, um, hunter and gathering communities that, um, ate things such as fish and other abundant resources were able to increase their population because there wasn't as much competition for, uh, the resources. And then it also talked about, um, I think it was Morgan and Child in the beginning of the chapter where, um, Morgan's theory was basically based on the idea that, uh  of domination and how humans, um, view animals and plants and basically the planet as, um, as they're dominant over it, over, uh, the planet. And, um, whereas Child's theory was more of an interactionist theory, that we all kind of interact together, and even talked about symbiotic relationships of animals, and I think they mentioned ants and trees and how, um, they evolved together to protect each other, in a sense. And, um, whereas I think they were saying it's  well, I guess some theorists think that, um, agriculture may be the opposite in that they don't grow together and, uh, we aren't, um, you know, codependent with the, uh, with earth; that we tend to dominate. And, um, they also discussed, um, aspects that helped, um, I guess innovate agriculture and it talked about domestication and tools and, um, I forget the third, but how having technology and different tools and stuff like that can help you, um, to gather more and how we're not, um, as dependent, and because of I guess mass agriculture, we can have larger populations. But then it also argued that, well, maybe it's because our growing population forced us to, um, you know, produce more food, but I don't know if I'd necessarily agree with that, but, um. And then it also talked about, um  I guess that was basically the main points I got from it, the different theories of agriculture, the different time periods, the prehistoric versus, um, more modern agriculture and, um, kind of the shift in perspective and, um, how, you know, we may be dominant and animals are no longer, um, kind of in control of their own lives and we make life-and-death situations for them as, um, herders and shepherds, um, and we're able to have larger populations. And we don't necessarily feel like we're in a symbiotic relationship with a plant because, um, this is just opinion now, but, uh, we're kind of at this point destroying the planet and basically parasites, in a way, because of the way we treat the planet, but that's not really a summary, that's my own opinion.

Starting. Uh, this chapter was, um, a textbook on what I thought was public speaking and communications. It talked about, um, the intent of a speaker and ethics and also about, um, the means and ends of a speaker, um, how they should tailor their, uh, speeches to their audience and be aware of the consequences of their speeches. And although it's not necessarily their faults for any actions that listeners may take, um, they still should, um, at least before they make the speech understand certain consequences of what they say and how people may act to it. Um, it also talked about, um, just being aware of, uh, before you say  um, before you give a speech to, um, to just like think through if it's ethical or not and how there are different, um, uh, ways you can achieve your means and your end. Uh, and it gave the example of, you know, of a good situation versus a bad. So if you wanted somebody to help you edit your paper, a good means would be to, um, you know, entice them to edit your paper because then in turn you would edit theirs. Then a bad means would be if you, um, asked them to edit your paper or you'll blackmail them, and that's obviously a bad way to get to what you want, but they both lead to what you want, and the same is true for ends. Um. It also talked about, um, how there's a code of ethics, and if you're not sure if something is ethical or not, um, you can either talk to different people or I guess look up the requirements in the code of ethics and, um  but you don't necessarily have to do that with every decision you make, but just maybe some important ones that you're not sure about. And I'm trying to think of other things. And that was basically it.

  discussed psychology and, um, social interactions and discussed, um, the smaller components of it and then went on to a larger scale. So it first talked about, um, I don't remember the exact terms, but, um, basically the people that you're around, your family, your friends, and that's kind of your, um, I guess social support. And then it talked about, um, social influence and how, um, different people have influence on, um, you know, the way you think and things that you believe and your behavior and, um, how a lot of what people do is based on behaviorism and not necessarily their personality. So it made the example of cults and how, uh, members of said cults, um, they  they're not necessarily weird or in that cult because of their personality, it's just, um, just behaviorism. Same with, um, if you're out on a deserted road and nobody's with you, you'll still stop at a stop sign or at least slow down because that, um, that cultural behavior is so engrained in you. And then it was talking about cultural norms that, uh, the vast majority of society deem acceptable and appropriate behavior and how that leads to, um, different cultures and, um, cultural influences. And, um, and it was also talking about cognition and, um, ABC. And, um, C was Cognition, B was I think Behavior, and A was like Adapt or something like that? I can't remember. But, um, it was just kind of talking about the process of, um, I guess why you know what you know and how you're persuaded to look at things differently depending on different influences.

There are eight characteristics that define living things. And living things are hierarchically organized. And basic science and  ohh. I forget the other one. There is debate regarding, uh, appropriate uses of science, one being for the sake of learning and one being for the sake of application to real problems.

  ogists historically believed that, um, humans transitioning from hunting and gathering to agriculture was a reflection of a movement towards more advanced ways of life. But now, um, archeologists mostly agree that that is not the case and now they are looking for what might have caused that transition.

  discussed, um, three principles of ethics in terms of public speaking and encouraged the reader to assess the intent, means, and ends of, uh, of their actions and explain the NCA's credo with respect to public speaking.

  study of social psychology is, um, the study of interactions between individuals and people around them, which is found to heavily influence their behavior, um, and relies on affect, behavior, and cognition.

Oh. Um, OK. So the information was about, um, social psychology and how, um, we're influenced by different situations and those around us. So it talked about how, um, social influence could be, um, that of someone in front of you influencing you or more passively with someone, um, the feeling of being watched or, um, having knowledge of rules, which also kind of led into social cognition and having ideas of who, um  who, um  of how you should act within your society, which is  has been influenced by all the  how you were raised and all the social influences that they talked about in the beginning. Um, and just a lot of, uh, different things about how we exist within society, so, um, how our mood and our, um, affect affects our daily lives and how we interact with people and how we feel about people based on, um, things we feel like we know. And ultimately, um, there was an  the idea of reciprocal, um, alt  oh my gosh  altruism in which, um, you do things for others with the expectation that you will in the future also be able to, um, receive that same benefit.

So the past chapter was discussing, um, pure science and applied science and definitions of those as well as, uh, taxonomy for, um, living organisms and also the definition of said living organisms, which could include homeostasis and reproductive capacities. And it also discussed as I said the taxonomy of these different, um, elements within the animal kingdom.

So this past chapter talked about agriculture and how it came about within the human species. Um, it gave a brief timeline on it and also discussed different views about it. Um, one of the main individuals believed that, um, it came from savagery to barbarism, um, while another, uh, believed that it was the Neolithic revolution, which involved the biggest benefit was the human participation in food storage. And other - both of these individuals believed that this was a departure of humans from nature, um, and whether or not that was a positive or negative thing was - it was kind of a neutral. Um, other viewpoints were brought up of where, um, of whether or not this agriculture is neutral. One person argued that it, um, was symbiotic relationship between domes - regarding domestication of animals, um, and it was coevolutionary. And others believed it was more of a humans, um, dominating another species. Um, agriculture was also defined, um, uh, broken into three specific parts of community, um, technology, and domestication. Um, and one individual, um, brought up the fact that agriculture could have stemmed from, um, the problem - not the problem - but the boom in population as opposed to the population boom coming because of the ability of food storage through agriculture. And it was also discussed that, uh, such facets of agriculture like domestication of animals, um, arose in different areas in the world around the same time but were not necessarily one group of people bringing it to another; it just occurred.

So this chapter talked about, um, the ethics within public speaking and so it focused on intent and means and ends and how to ethically, um, ethically analyze all three of these aspects when you are, um, preparing a speech or listening to a speech or giving a speech and how you can be a better or at least more ethical person when it comes to doing any of those actions. Um, it talked about prejudice and judgments and how when evaluating you really have to remove yourself from those kind of things. Um, it talked about plagiarism and being aware of the sources you're using and giving credit to those you need to credit to, um, what else. Um, that's it.

This chapter talked about social psychology and what changed that so things like social situations and social influence, social norms and how culture is based on, um, predetermined social norms. Um, it also talked about the ABCs, which were affect, behavior, and cognition and the difference between mood and emotion. It also discussed social benefits and costs and discussed just interactions between people and how that could be studied further. Um, and it also touched on reciprocal altruism, which is when you, um, when individuals do things for others, um, for the purpose that they believe that they will be receiving the same treatment whether that be in the future or actions sooner, um, but this is not always the case.

This section of reading was, uh, probably a biology textbook. And there were different components about organisms and there were different hierarchies like in the taxonomy. And there were different types of science like the basic science and the applied science and again those are just more knowledge for knowledge is the basic and applied science is more for a specific functional purpose. And you can have - there's an argument about which one comes first, like maybe you need the basic science, the knowledge for knowledge to get the applied science or maybe you need the applied science before you can do the basic knowledge.

So this last essay talked about agriculture and started out with a definition of agriculture, talked about its origins, main theorists, the three main components and also the impact agriculture has on society or cultures. So going a little more into the theorists; Child, for example, talked about a neologic [ph] revolution and that was about getting control of food and how getting control of food impacts populations and communities and the theory of how agriculture formed that way. And it also talks about how theorists are debating how agriculture came about and its impacts and whether it was good or bad. And it talks about a lot of the triggers of agricultures, for example, whether external factors could have caused agriculture like population or climate change. And it talked about the three main components like I mentioned before and those components were domestication, technology, and community. And then again on the impact it talked about how, um, coming from hunters and gatherers to having agriculture in our society has changed spiritual beliefs. It's changed communities. It's changed where people live. It's changed people's time and it's just had a very large impact.

This last chapter was on ethical considerations in public speaking and it talked about the pyramid of the ethical consideration framework and that involved the intent of your message, the means or your behavior by which you go about your message and the ends so your desired outcome. And then it went into considerations as a speaker including diversity and, um, being understanding and - and the - I think it's like the DNC credo, which is - shoot. Basically, be a good speaker. You should be ethical and be honest.

So the last chapter was on social psychology and the history and principles. So it started out talking about, um, how a person's characteristics are kind of built but then how social interactions and influences have a greater impact on their behavior and decisions often than their personal characteristics. And then it went into cultural norms and it talked about how that contributes to diversity and the cultural norms can be impacted by people's families, their education, their religion, a variety of different factors. And then it went to describe how there's a lot of different ways that people are impacted and there's the ABCs of social psychology and those are affect, which are feelings; behaviors, which are interactions; and cognition, which is a person's thoughts. And so all of those kind of go into how a person acts. And then there is reciprocal altruism, which is the idea that there's a give and take in society and there are benefits but there are also social costs and how those play out in society and how they're important and how those kind of concepts bring out the idea of things like cheating, how we can identify a cheater in society because they're not following reciprocal altruism and they're not doing give and take. They're just doing the take.

OK, so that reading was about agriculture and the way that it became about in society today. Um, it talked about the attitudes of some theorists and how they viewed, um, the move from a hunter gatherer society to a more, um, agricultural based society. Some felt that it was a move from - or it was a move towards barbarism. Child discussed that it was about the - or that it involved the Neolithic revolution. And, um, another opinion discussed that it was when the domestic - domestication of animals began. Um, it also discussed that there is no true, um, there isn't any strong evidence regarding just one event or one reason why, uh, the push towards agriculture began. Um, there's many different opinions.

So the article was about the three levels of the ethics pyramid and how they can be utilized when analyzing and evaluating public speaking. Additionally the article aimed to discuss the NCA credo and it divulged into information about how, um, why public speakers should be cognizant of those ethical principles and how they can affect their listeners. So [INAUDIBLE] the three levels of the ethics pyramid included mean - or included intentions, means, and ends. And those components all can impact a - or and all of those things are important to be mindful of when you're listening to a public speaker so intentions or so - yeah, intentions, were [INAUDIBLE] beginning. Means, how they went about getting to the next point and ends is desired outcome. And so if you have that entire picture then you're able to better assess the public speaker in general. Then the NCA creed, which addressed six different components and within each component the author discussed, um, why they were so important to be aware of and how they can impact a listener.

This was a chapter in biology and first it went over the different, um, things that all living organisms have in common like there's order to their structure. They need to maintain homeostasis. Um, they grow and develop in specific ways according to their DNA. Um, they adapt to their environment. Um, they reproduce and in doing so they pass down their - their genes to their offspring. Um, and then there's one more, I think, I can't remember. And then after that portion it talked about, um - he talked about - he talked about atoms and molecules and how molecules are made up of two or more atoms. It talked about cells and how living organisms are made up of cells and then those cells, uh, those cells form tissues and tissues form organs and then you build up to a living organism. And then it talked about the, um, the hierarchy of categorizing living things so I think species and genus and family - I forget the other different stuff. So that goes all the way up to domain and then there are three, um, three different domains, one of which was just recently discovered or created, I guess, um, in the '90s. This is the domain that, um, that encompasses the different types of bacteria that are on the earth. And then after that it talked about the difference between basic science and applied science. So basic science is, they gave the term "science for science" - no, "knowledge for knowledge sakes." Um, and it's pretty much you're just trying to expand the, um, the current knowledge of a certain topic versus applied science is when you're specifically trying to find, um, specifically trying to find solutions to world problems.

This chapter covered the views on the development of agriculture. So historically, um, people believed that agriculture developed due to society wanting to kind of get away from nature and, um, and kind of find a better way of life so they moved from hunter gatherer to agriculture. Um, but they're having challenges - or people have challenged this notion. They say that, um, they say that - they challenge the notion that in agriculture moved to a better way of life with the fact that hunter gatherer societies did not take as much time to find and gather and hunt for food than it does for people to plant their own food. And also, due to agriculture, certain permanent villages were founded and because of this there was widespread disease. Um, there have been alternative views on why agriculture was developed so one such view is the thought that people and nature have a symbiotic relationship in which they equally benefit from a relationship. So instead of, um, getting - actually getting away from nature, they are still working with nature. Um, another view is that it developed because people or society, um, moved from being a trusting society to a society of dominance. So at first as hunter gatherers, we trusted that we would find sources for food and that nature would provide for us. And we moved towards, um, a belief that we needed to control our source of food and in order to do that, we developed agriculture. Um, let's see, researchers also think that there are certain events in history that may have caused or partially caused agriculture develop - to develop. So one of these events could be the change in climate and another one could be the change in population so the increase in population. Um, population, that's all I remember. 

OK, this chapter was on the ethics of public speaking. So first it talked about the pyramid of ethics, um, the ethics pyramid. So the first part of the pyramid is the intent, so if your intentions are either ethical or unethical and sometimes it's possible that your intentions are ethical but you end up doing something unethical accidentally. Uh, the second part is the means for how you go about getting some sort of results. So they gave the example of, um, a person wanting their friend to look over their speech for them. And an ethical way of convincing their friend would be to promise them that they would do the same for them and their speech. An unethical way would be to blackmail them into, um, into looking over their speech for them. And the third part of the pyramid is the ends. So for the ends can be ethical or unethical or, um, in a gray area so they can be ethical for the sender of the message or the receiver of the message or vice or versa. Um, so and then the chapter went on to talk about ethics in public speaking. So one aspect would be to tell the truth. Um, some public speakers have a tendency to exaggerate or to ignore certain parts of a topic in order to prove a point and that is unethical. They need to tell the whole story. Um, another aspect of ethics in public speaking would be, um, a listener has to, um, go into listening without any prejudgments. And so they gave the example of what you've heard about a professor can bias your perceptions of them in the first day of class. So in a way that's unethical. You should give them a chance to - you should give speakers a chance to, um, relay their message before judging them or their message. Um, and then another aspect is, um, a speaker should keep in mind their audience and their needs and, um, their point of view. And then a speaker should be courageous in fighting for justice and fairness. So this made the example of Martin Luther King for that one and that's - and that's all I remember. 

So this chapter was on social psychology and it looked into the effects of - the people, um, looked into the effects of society on, um, individual's behaviors. Um, and they found that the effect of society is more important than individual traits or characteristics. And they gave the example of mass suicide for this and they found that, um, the effect of their env - of their social group, like a characteristic - or charismatic - charismatic leader as opposed to individual, uh, characteristics had that effect on people. So it went into the different knowledges - I think I'm remembering that right - um, so let's see there was affect knowledge so there was schema, which was the knowledge, just simple knowledge about something or background information, yes, facts about something. So that's schema versus - hm, I forgot what the other one was. That one was just - I think that was acting your feelings about something and so a combination of both will let you - will let you, um, quickly categorize something without really fully thinking about it. And then there is the ABCs again. So there is affect, um, behavior, and cognitive - maybe that was de-cognitive. Um, that's all I remember. 

The beginning of the section started out with, um, the basic units of life. Um, the smallest unit of life is an atom. Um, two or more atoms combined, um, are a molecule. Let's see, gave the example, um, of a virus and didn't [INAUDIBLE]. Hm. Well, it gave the example of the virus and discussing that it was not considered an actual, um, living cell. I can't remember what was underneath that. Um, then it talked about the basic components of a living organism and it talked about, um, homeostasis and, um, reproduction, growth and development. I can't think of that one word. Um, OK, well, it gave the example of, um, the atoms being, uh, grouped into cells, the cells, the grouping of cells, um, together to form cells, um, and the grouping of tissues, um, that perform similar functions together to create organs and groupings of organs that have similar functions, um, into systems. And then discussing whole organisms, um, which are a multitude of grouping of, um, organs and all the way back down to cells with similar functions. Talked about the differences between, um, the sciences, um, relating to a basic knowledge and I believe, um, the basic knowledge they, um, defined as being a pure knowledge or a general understanding of basic sciences. Um, and the, I believe it was theoretical, they did, um, um, was the more practical and adaptive use of the basic knowledge and it had a brief description below saying that most scientists wanted to kind of get away from that discussion of the basic knowledge and move toward, uh, just focusing on the theoretical but kind of need that, um, basic and general understanding in order to understand and continue to improve on the theoretical. And, um, it gave, what was it, penicillin, the example of penicillin, um, that had happened as an accident. Um, I believe, um, it was left in a dish out and it, um, I believe it was left open and it grew mold, which was actually the penicillin.

The three components of agriculture are domestication, technology, and community. Domestication is defined by the relationship between humans and plants and animals. Technology is the tools used and community is defined not only by the physical rearrangement of the landscape but also the way that the people view the landscape. 15,000 years ago was when humans shifted from hunter gatherer societies to agricultural societies.

OK, the essay I read discussed the ethics of, uh, speaking, public speaking and communications and it discussed the term ethics as being very broad, um, and being interpreted differently by different people. But Tilley created the ethics pyramid, which includes, um, intention, means, and ends. The intention, um, representing the goal or the, um, drive, um, behind the message that is being spread. The means, the tools or the behavior that is used to, um, to - to share this, um, knowledge or whatever is being conveyed during the communication. And it talked about the difference between, um, for example, something ethical would be, um, explaining to someone why, um, it's important and then, um, all of the reasons that you think it is important versus something that would be unethical as in threatening or blackmailing someone into, um, believing what you think or going along with what you think. And the ends is the, um, desired outcome that comes from that behavior and tools such as, um, convincing people to donate money to, I believe, they gave the example of donating money to Relay For Life, um, or some other organization. Um, the next section talked about the NCA - yes, NCA adopting the, um, credo for ethical communications in 1999. Um, there were a number of - it's hard to remember specifics from that now. The majority of it talked about, um, honesty and being, um, honest about where the source of the information comes from, um, not plagiarizing so rewording or just conveying the information in your own words, um, sharing, um, and communicating information about civil liberties. I don't remember any more. 

Um, there is an ethics pyramid that consists of the intent, means, and ends, um. Oh, means are the ways in which you approach how to achieve your desired outcome and ends are the results of those. Um, don't plagiarize, um, in order to, um, in order to avoid plagiarism be sure to include your sources in your public speeches as well as being honest about those sources. Yeah, I don't know. 

OK, this essay discussed, um, social psychology, um, being the study of the, uh, dynamic relationship between, um, an individual and all of the other people that the individual interacts with. Um, talked about, um, social norms being the, um, collective, uh, trying to find the right words for this, the collective attributes of a, um, acceptable attributes of a certain, um, social group. Um, social psychologists refer to the, um, ABCs, um, A being affect, um, B being behavior, and C being cognition. The affect being the feelings; B, uh, behavior being the action and the cognition being the thought. Um, discussed, uh, for the affect and the feelings the differences between, uh, mood and emotions, uh, mood being the more long term general positive or negative feelings and, um, emotions being the more short term, um, kind of responses to something new. And it discussed at the bottom of the essay, um, the definition of social altruism, um, meaning, um, the sharing of, um, a resource or, um, the act of doing something for someone else and then, uh, with the intent of that being reciprocated at another time for the other individual.

So this reading was about biology. Um, there are eight characteristics of all living organisms, um, and these eight characteristics include order, which is the cellular complexity of an organism, um, sensitivity or response to stimuli, which is like how an organism, yeah, responds to a stimuli. So for example, um, a plant that reaches towards, uh, the sun. Um, then there's reproduction. There's homeostasis, which is maintaining, um, like a balanced internal state. Um, there's growth and development, um, regulation, um, something about - oh, I think regulation is the adaptation to, um, an organism's environment. Um, and then, yeah, I don't remember the rest. And then, um, all living things are made up of atoms, which make molecules and then they're - uh, the cells have organs and organelles and, um, some other stuff in there. Um, and then there are eight, um, levels of the taxonomic system, which are, um, species, genus, order, uh, family, class, phylum, kingdom, domain. And then, um, domain has three different parts. I think that there's eukarya, um, eukarya, archea, and bacteria. And then, um, it talked about basic science versus applied science and how basic science is just knowledge for the sake of knowledge or just getting that information out there, um, and it doesn't necessarily have kind of an end goal for application. And then, um, um, applied - or yeah - basic science and applied science. Applied science, um, has an end goal like curing a disease or saving, you know, a population of animals from extinction. Um, and there's a lot of debate between these two different types of sciences because some people call, um, the basic science useless and, um, applied science useful. And when like, you know, both arguments have a valid point but it's not always the case that, I mean, sometimes you need the basic science in order to come up with the applied science. Um, and then they talked about how penicillin was discovered and how Fleming like left something open that, um, got moldy and that became penicillin and that is helping people everywhere now so that is how basic science helps applied science.

OK, so this passage was about agriculture. Um, so about 15,000 years ago we went from a hunter gatherer lifestyle to this agricultural lifestyle. Don't worry about it. Thank you. Um, and so there were these two perspectives that were kind of the earlier perspectives, um, on agriculture and those were Morgan and Child. And Morgan believed that we as humans took ourselves outside of nature in order to kind of develop agriculture. Um, and then Child believed that, um, like one thing led to another and us being like active, um, in producing food kind of, um, led to a growth in population and then that led to, um, development in general. And then, um, three people who kind of opposed these ideas were - again forgot the first person's name, Rindas [ph], I think? And then Engold [ph] and Solens [ph]. So, um, Rindas believed in a symbiotic relationship with humans and food, I guess, or like the, um, food that they're growing. Um, and Engold believed in kind of domination. And then Solens believed in, oh man, what was it, one of the questions reminded me what it was and now I already forgot. Um, I'll come back to that; Solens I'll come back to if I remember. And then, um, yeah, there are three components to agriculture and they are again the only one I remember is technology. OK, let me think about Solens since you have a test that you need to prepare for. Um, I don't remember. OK. Sorry.

OK, so this ethics reading, um, revolved around, um, the ethics pyramid and the - this like code that the NCA came up with, um, to kind of start an ethics discussion. Um, so the, um, pyramid has three tiers. There's intent, means, and ends. They all have a spectrum and like kind of a gray area and, um, in terms of like ethical versus unethical. Um, so intent so somebody could have good intentions or bad intentions, um, and you can be unintentionally unethical, um, or vice versa. Um, the means is what you - how you get to the ends, basically, how you get to the desired outcome, um, like the tools that you use to do so, um, and then the ends are your desired outcome. Um, so you might, in terms of public speaking, you might, um, your goal at the end of your speech might be X, Y, or Z. Um, and then you can kind of use these, um, these three tiers of the pyramid to sort of judge behavior and public speaking in general. Um, and then this, uh, NCA like code talked about how like what's ethical, what's unethical and how you can be, um, kind of an open listener when you're, uh, listening to somebody and when you should be, um, ethical when you talk in terms of citing information that you find and being honest with your information and not exaggerating or distorting it or not omitting certain information to benefit your ends. Um, and then, you know, being just a morally good person, like standing up to injustice and inequality and, um, yeah, I think that's it again.

OK, it's going. OK, so I just read an excerpt from a social psychology textbook about social behaviors and social interactions and how people view, um, others and how, um, those are called schemas and attitudes is how you view others. Um, social interactions are, um, I guess, how you interact with others. Um, and then there was also, um, reciprocal - reciprocal something, which basically means that, um, you do good things for people with the expectation of getting something in return eventually. Um, and talked about how your mood and affect, um, affect how you feel on a day to day basis and how that affects your emotions. And emotions are longer lasting things than mood and yeah, that's all I remember.

So, um, this piece of information talks about the importance of biology. Biology is the science of life. Um, and there are certain functions and characteristics that define the study of biology. Um, and the first one that starts off for example is order, which talks about the hierarchy of within biology as, you know, going from single cell organism all the way up to ecosystems. And then there's also other functions and characteristics like reproduction, which includes passing on DNA, adaptability, which includes, um, the ability of certain species to change certain characteristics to fit into certain environments, um, as well as reproduction, which I, you know, mentioned, passing down of DNA. And then also response to stimuli such as, for example, a plant shifting like moving to face the sunlight to be able to perform photosynthesis. Um, and then other ones like, uh, I can't remember any right now but those are the general, the first few that are talked about, um, as well as - oh yeah. And then there's one function where living organisms are able to control their internal environment through thermeostasis [ph], I believe, which is basically a regulation of body temperature, which helps them survive in certain conditions whether it's hot or cold depending on what the extremes are. Um, and then the piece of information also talks about, uh, the hierarchy of living organisms so starting off with the atom, which is the smallest, uh, unit of living organisms, to mole - molecules and then kind of growing further into like tissues and how that construct to like cells and then tissues. Um, and then organs and then what an organism is and then in terms of communities and then species all the way up to ecosystem. And the ecosystem describes basically how species and organisms work with the environment and kind of coexist with one another. And then, um, it also talks about the taxonomy or it's kind of like how species and organisms are divided, um, from genus and then, uh, yeah, and then a few others that I can't recall. And then there's also - yeah, and then the naming systems are also discussed so there's like the genus and then species and that's how, um, that's how scientists categorize certain organisms. Um, and then at the end of the information I believe something about basic science and applied science and the differences between the two, basic science being, um, the building blocks of biology and how certain, um, how basic concepts and theories work in the natural world. And then applied science would be the applicability of those basic practices and scientists believe that one would not work without the other. Um, for example, one of the popular examples given was DNA and so basic science would introduce what DNA is and discuss its, um, you know, importance and it's composition and then applied science would use it for crime scene investigations and paternity tests, um, basically applying it to the world [INAUDIBLE] all that I remember.

So, the chapter that I just read, um, talks about the origin of agriculture and, um, how it evolved from in hunter gatherer society to kind of creating a progression for the human race. Um, and it talks about a lot of studies and theories that have been introduced by different scholars on whether it was - agriculture was a way of dominance for humans to exert on nature and what that relationship, um, has evolved to become and observations on, um, you know, hunter gatherer, the time period that hunter gatherers, um, were - got for leisure, for example, which was more than agriculturalists and what that suggests were progressive human theories. And then, um, it also talks about studies that have attempted to explain this progression in terms of, um, what, uh, humans seek as just a species, um, and whether in fact all agriculture is, uh, a controlled, is an attempt to control the environment by choice or it just a natural growth of us as a species. And then it also divides, uh, agriculture into three components, which I can retain pretty well because it clearly states domestication, which includes, um, in a sense controlling nature and then technology, which is the tools you need, and then community, which is the general landscape. And that pretty much summarizes, um, the way in which, yeah, agriculture is studied.

Great, so, um, the chapter that I read a while back is on the ethics of communication. Um, and it begins by, um, presenting, uh, a pyramid structure of thinking about ethics that was introduced by a professor whose last name is Tilney [ph]. Um, and it - the pyramid basically starts with intent and then to means and then end. Intent being, um, the intent of the - the communicator and the listener, um, and so if a person's intent is honest and if they are intending to communicate a certain amount of information in a advised and, uh, truthful way, basically. And if the - and the intent of the listener would be, er, is the listener willing to listen to everything with an open mind and, um, through ethical means. And then means are basically the tools, uh, and behaviors that determine like specific outcome. Um, and they would just include like discourse within speech and, you know, uh, the kind of the allowing certain speech to determine how people view that issue or, yeah, along those lines. But means also talks about, I think, plagiarism, which, um - no plagiarism is talked about it intent because it could be that someone could unintentionally be unethical, um, and sometimes plagiarism crosses over in that gray area because there are situations where someone could be implicitly hinting at a reference without necessarily knowing where they heard it from or how they got that information in the first place. Um, and then, yeah, and then means was obviously the tools and behaviors. And then the outcome would be what those tools, behaviors, and intent of the communication led to, like what outcome it led to basically and whether, um, that happened through ethical forms. Um, and then Tilney talks about three questions that are significant in deciding if, you know, a certain action is ethical, a certain form of communication is ethical. Um, the first one being have others been consulted, um, and kind of have multiple perspectives been considered. Um, the second one is have known codes of ethics been, um, analyzed and have, you know, has the research been referred to, um, about that, you know, whether a certain thing is ethical or not. Um, and the third one was, I think, diversity and of opinion again and if like multiple people and multiple perspectives have been considered but I may be wrong about that. And then, um, and then yeah and then the chapter also talks about NCA, which is the National Communications Association, which introduced a credo for ethical communication in '99. And that basically outlined certain codes of behavior and, um, things to consider, uh, for communicators and public speakers and people just passing on messages, um, about, you know, the ethics of what they're saying and how they're saying it. Um, and one of the - some of the key points that were brought up was, for example, you know in certain situations it's easy for people, especially speakers to shut off on opinions that they don't agree with. Um, whereas - and the NCA very particularly highlights that as important in terms of listening to diverse ideas and opinions even if they may not be exactly what you agree with, um, which is basically encouraging speakers to also be good listeners and hearing different points of view in order to create a better message that is, you know, leveled and balanced. Um, and then it's also about taking ownership or the effect of what you're saying and so the fact that rhetoric could lead to certain outcomes that are unintentional or, you know, that may be unethical in nature. But the communicator does have a certain responsibility in invocating those ideas in people and that, you know, it's the responsible thing and the ethical thing to do to take initiative in - to some degree and responsibility of some kind. Um, so yeah, that's what I remember.

Uh, social psychology is the study of relationships between people and, um, their environment and the way in which they interact with others. This specific piece of information talks about the way in which social psychology affects communities and cultures and social norms and the development of certain behavior over periods of time due to, you know, uh, contextual, um, and historical reasons. Uh, yeah, so the article - or not the article - the piece of information talks about, uh, social norms as having been developed over time due to certain ideas about individuals and relationships and this, um, inadvertent, uh, gravitation towards values and beliefs that have been inculcated by parents or superiors and how that changes the way in which we interact with others basically. Um, and then there's also a discussion on, you know, mood and emotion and the things that affect feeling towards other individuals and how that can create, um, cultural and social norms that determine relationships essentially. Um, it is also interesting that, um, a lot of people name social psychology and relationships as very important in their lives and interactions and it is sometimes the premier point of, um, like it's top priority for a lot of people, which makes this study extremely important. Um, there's also discussion on, um, so - like social, um, costs and benefits so what you give and what you get back in interactions with individuals. So for example, um, in this concept of reciprocal altruism, which is, you know, giving to somebody in hopes and expectation of getting that back, um, at a certain point, um, and challenges and pros that that presents. Um, there's also, uh, a discussion on the - the importance of culture and how, uh, influence is studied by psychologists. So for example in cult environments, um, a lot of psychologists study the leaders rather than the members as a way to see how ideology permeated from top down. Um, and then it also discussed culture and why studying culture is important and how cultures have developed in their relationships with certain themes like time and space and - and just general social interactions. Especially now because there's so much multicultural, um, there's so many multicultural environments in the world especially in the United States to a point where the article or the piece of information mentions, um, the fact that - that minorities already comprise one-third of the U.S. population, um, and by 2042 it's expected to be half of the population, which is therefore - which therefore means that there will be a lot of different cultures interacting and understanding social psychology is very crucial so yeah.

So, the chapter was about biology and it discussed, um, some basics of biology. They started by discussing life and what constitutes as life and there were eight different, um, characteristics that went into what categorizes something as being living. Um, they included things like metabolism, uh, thermoregulation, so ability to maintain your body temperature in certain climates, um, the ability to reproduce, um, so to create offspring and to keep your traits going. Um, the ability to adapt, um, to new environments and things like that so that would go - fall into the category of survival of the fittest so always just making sure that you are able to, um, survive in the environment that you're in. Let's see, they also discussed the difference between, um, multi and single cell organisms and that life usually consists of more complex, um, multi-cellular organisms. Um, after the discussion of what constitutes as living then they - the chapter discussed taxonomy and the order of living things and, uh, essentially taxonomy is a hierarchal order and it goes from least to highest. And, um, it starts with the organism and species and genus and then family and order, uh, and class and kingdom and something else. And, um, that they all kind of feed into each other as they move up the hierarchy. And then finally the chapter discussed basic versus applied science and basic science is essentially, uh, learning knowledge for the sake of knowledge so learning something just to have the knowledge. Sometimes this turns into applying that knowledge, um, for applied science, but oftentimes it's just so you can learn what certain things are. And then applied science, um, is applying what you know, that knowledge, to real life problems, um, in the real world.

So the reading was about the evolution of agriculture. And a lot of anthropologists have conflicting ideas and theories of how agriculture really, um, evolved from the get-go. And in early times with the earlier anthropologists they believed that agriculture was formed more out of the, um, innate need for humans to be more dominant and disconnected from nature, um, and one of them stated that it was moving from savagery to more barbarianism, um, which is interesting. But so then after that they were discussing the Neolithic revolution, which is talking about how, um, humans became more in control and domesticated animals and plants, um, in order to get benefit out of them. And then further down the line there was discussion of a symbiotic relationship between humans and plants and animals, that they receive mutual benefit from each other. Um, then there was, um, let's see. I think that was the biological theory. Um, but then in later years there was conflicting discussion regarding, um, whether or not the evolution of agriculture was because humans were looking to be better or if they, it just kind of was a natural progression. And, uh, one anthropologist discussed how hunter gatherers started off as being more generalized and that they would rely on just sparse resources, not really needing a whole lot, but this caused a lot of competition, which, um, then require - or didn't allow for large populations to thrive from. And so this group of generalized hunter gatherers then evolved to being more of the expert hunter gatherers that relied on, um, the resources that were more bountiful that, um, like the nuts and the salmon and things like that that they could use from their, um, land but that were really substantial. And this group of hunter gatherers, they took the competitiveness from, um, the earlier hunter gatherers which ended up being maladaptive for them and turning it into more of a positive light, um, one that created kind of a community of the hunter gatherers in that they made it competitive for people to go out and get as much as they could, um, as far as meat and plants and nuts and things like that and they would just have these large feasts. And this turned out to being, you know, having these feasts more and more frequently. And then - and this was enabling of larger populations then as well. And then this group eventually evolved to being agriculturalists or the farmers. Um, somewhere along those lines they were talking about the differences between the hunter gatherer and the agriculture fam - groups and that, um, the agriculturalists actually led a less healthy lifestyle, um, because they were living closer to people and this caused disease to spread more easily within them. Um, let's see, um, then, uh, I think that's all I'm remembering right now.

Oh, the reading discussed ethics in public speaking and they began by discussing the pyramid of ethics and this includes intent, means, and ends. And intent includes kind of, um, the intention behind what you're saying. Um, so is this something that you're being honest about. Is it something that, um, will speak well for the masses that you're talking to. Um, the authors discussed doing kind of a consensus before presenting, um, just to see what the listener's view of ethics is regarding certain topics. Um, the authors also - excuse me - also brought up the fact that a lot of institutions have ethic guidelines that individuals should be following. Uh, to continue, the authors discussed unintentional, um, like mal - or negative intention, um, like plagiarism, which is when people, uh, quote somebody but unintentionally don't give that person credit. Um, then means is, um, the behaviors, um, or tools that you use to get specific outcomes. Um, there can be good and bad means, um, the good being, um, giving, um, somebody else services while, uh, whenever they need it while they're giving you services now to help you out. Um, or - and so that's more reciprocal. Or there's the bad means, which, um, is pretty much coercing somebody into doing something for you. And so regardless of means, you're going to get the same outcome. Then finally, um, the third pillar of the - or not pillar - but portion of the pyramid, um, is an ends and these are your desired outcomes, um so whatever you are trying to get with those means. Um, the rest of the chapter discussed the National Communication Association's, um, principles and essentially the principles that they laid down are that speakers and individuals, um, need to rely on honesty, um, truth and reason. Um, they discussed that a lot of public speakers end up, um, really going beyond the truth, um, just in order to make a exciting story or to make the connection with their listeners a little bit stronger. Um, but this isn't really being honest necessarily. Um, they also discussed the importance of diversity, um, in creating an individual's view or opinion of something, um, that it's important for an individual to have a more holistic view of a specific opinion, um, or topic. There was also discussion of, um, what's that [INAUDIBLE] oh, having kind of the responsibility for what you say and taking the responsibility of the consequences for any short term or long term, um, issues coming from the things that you decide to say. Um, but that we need to have that nice mutual respect with whomever we're listening to. Um, finally there are still ethics as a listener so not just as a speaker but also as a listener in that we need to, um, take what the speaker is saying with a grain of salt. Um, that a lot of individuals kind of passively listen and just agree with what's being told to them. Um, but it's encouraged to create your own, um, thoughts and opinions regarding these different topics and not to feel confounded by what's being told to you.

Mm-hm, so the reading was about social psychology and how it influences people's interactions. And it started off by discussing the social situation, which is how you relate to other people in your life. And so that's essentially all of the relationships that you have and that's how people view - I'm sorry. Um, and then social situation builds into social influence or relates to social influence in that, um, the people who surround you influence the way that you act and interact with others. Um, and social influence kind of also feeds into the - to making cultural norms, um, and social norms, um, which is essentially how - the way in which you interact with others. So the cultural norms though would be more characteristic of a certain, um, group that you're a part of. Um, it can be, you know, by area of where you live in, um, things like that. And so, um, the cultural norms influence the specific ways in which an individual interacts with those around them. And this can be the individuals within their same culture or out of their culture. Um, and this is very important, I think, because especially in America we have so many different cultures living together that it's important to know what is appropriate - appropriate or inappropriate in your interactions with them. Um, you want - you don't want to be disrespectful so you want to be able to, um, you want to be reciprocal of respect, um, with other cultures. And let's see, um, they also - this reading also discussed the importance of cognition, social cognition, um, which is knowing about how you interact with others. Um, wow, and also moods and emotions and how those differ where the moods that you have are just kind of ongoing throughout the day and emotions are more intense and these kind - these influence the way that you go about your daily life and how you interact with individuals. Because if you're having a positive mood you're going to be more inclined to help other people and, um, to be motivated to, you know, get things done and things like that. Um, they also talked about the social reciprocity. I don't remember the correct term for it. But some cultures believe that if they can they'll help somebody in need with the idea that the person who they help will reciprocate that same gesture when they are in a time of need.

There are two types of cells, prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Prokaryotes are generally single celled organisms, um, that lack organelles and a nuclei whereas eukaryotes do have organelles and a nuclei. Um, shit, um, virology is the study of viruses, um, which is a sub-field of biology. Um, viruses are not necessarily considered living organisms, though, because they are not made up of cells. Um, biology is the study of living organisms. Carl Linnaeus was the founder of bino - the binomial naming system, which is the species-genus, genus-species, something like that. Um, and he also created the hierarchical taxonomy, which consists of the genus, species, order, family, kingdom, domain, phylum, something else, yeah.

Social psychology is based on the ABCs: affect, behavior, and cognition. Affect has to do with schema and attitude. Schema is the information that you receive about a person or a group and attitude is the liking or disliking of said person or group. Um, behavior has to do with social reward and social cost, the positive and negative outcomes of yours or others' actions. Cognition has to do with thought and mood and emotions. Um, emotions are the short lived but intense feelings, um, usually influenced by a specific event whereas mood is your thoughts and feelings, um, like background thoughts and feelings based off of other experiences, um, and they usually last longer than emotions.

The chapter was talking about biology and it talked about the eight key characteristics that all living organisms had to have so some of them were, hm, adaptivity where they would adapt to an environment or evolve, um, to their environment. Um, reproduction where they'd reproduce DNA to create more organisms that, um, looked like them. Um, regulation so they're really complicated structures that regulated and, um, themselves and the other things like that. Um, and then it talked a bit about the way that organisms are, um, organized and how it goes from like the very smallest unit of life which is atom to the molecule to the cell, I think, and all the way up through, um, like families, populations and ecosystems, which is the largest. So ecosystems were where populations, um, all live together, um, and I think it also talked about the different kinds of cells, um, eukaryotes versus prokaryotes. Um, eukaryotic cells and so - eu - prokaryotic cells are like the most simple and they lack a nucleus and organelles but, um, the eukaryotic organisms have those more complex things. Um, so it also, yeah, it just talked about cell structure and what was within a cell. And then it ended by it talked about Linnaeus and, um, how he came up with this organizational system or classification system in the 18th century. Um, and then it ended talking about the difference between basic science and applied science, basic science being, um, more the just science for the purpose of, um, understanding something better and applied science being, um, science in order to solve a problem or answer a question. The researcher usually has a question, research question in mind. Um, and um, there's some debate about which one's more important or valuable and, um, a lot - one argument is that you wouldn't have applied science without basic science so you have to have an understanding in order to be able to then go on and use it for something, um, outside the field or to answer a question.

So the chapter was about the development of agriculture, um, and so it talked about kind of the last 15,000 years of, um, our - the human species and how it started with this, um, or how some theorists, agricultural theorists believe that, um, there agri - we, before agriculture, hunter and gatherer civilizations were, um, savage or barbaric and then there was, uh, a neo something theory that, um, suggested that - I don't remember what that theory suggested. But, um, essentially the more recent, um, theories have kind of found that perhaps it wasn't just, um, the agriculture was a sign that human - the human race was like moving forward, um, and advancing but that, um, a lot of factors played into the development of agriculture. And it wasn't necessarily that agriculture, um, was even superior to hunting and gathering. Because hunters and gatherers, um, had more leisure time, had less disease spread, um, but that certain factors that played into it might be, um, demands of a pop - growing population, climate change, um, and just different relationships with, um, nature and animals and, um, that population - that agriculture didn't come - necessarily come out of - or agriculture didn't, um, lead to an increase in population. It might have been the other way around. Um, and then there were kind of three factors and it ended with talking about, um, domestication, which is like a change in how, um, animals and nature are treated. Um, technology, so, um, advances in tools that could be used for agriculture. And then community and how different, um, people had relationships with each other and, um, became owners of the land and ultimately it was decided - or the theory more recent research suggests that it was much more complicated and there are many more factors, not just one, that led to agricultural development.

OK, the chapter talked about, um, ethics and covered the idea of this ethical pyramid, um, which had three parts: the, um, intent, which is like your intention to be ethical, um, the means, which is your behavior, um, and the end, which is the result of your behavior. And all of those things can either be done ethically or unethically. Um, so the second half of the chapter talked about, um, the N - the NCO credo, which is like the, um, ethics behind communication and particularly in giving, um, speeches and public speaking. And there were six parts to that, um, honesty so citing your sources and, um, giving honest representation, knowing where your sources came from, if they're bias. Um, and then, um, listening, um, ethically would be, um, listening to the - a person's point of view. Um, there was, um, one or there was one for injustice and inequality, um, and there were others for knowing your audience, what your audience, um, needs are. And also, um, for being responsible for what you're saying and your actions. Um, and essentially using all of these things in the pyramid, um, and thinking about balance between means or intent, means, and ends will allow you to be the most ethical communicator, um, and not taking advantage of someone, um, because you want to persuade them of something.

OK, so it was about, um, the chapter was about social psychology and the influences that, um, certain - certain influences that might affect, um, a person's ability to engage with others or feelings they have about others. It talked about, um, it talked about, um, subtle and overt influences, um, as well as the reason behind why we do things we do. And, um, it talked about the different ways we take in other people's actions through schemas and something else. And it also talked about, um, moods and emotions and how, um, they affected how we interpreted the world and engaged with other people. And about culture, um, and finally talked about social altruism, um, and how we have an expectation that if we do something for others, um, when we're in need, they, uh, our need will be fulfilled by others in the future, um, in a reciprocal way.

The chapter I just read was divided into three different parts, um, all around biology and the science of life. The first part was - were the eight different qualifications for something to be part of that like concept of life. They were around organization, um, adaptation, homeostasis, regulation, growth and development, reproduction, um, sensitivity in response to stimuli and, again, an eighth one I can't remember. Um, and then the article talked about the different levels of life in terms of organizations so starting really with the atom, moving up to the molecule, the cell, um, differentiating between single cell organisms and multicellular organisms. And then from there it goes to organs, um, and - or tissues and then organs and organ systems, um, which then make up organisms, which, um, a multitude of organisms makes a population and that population lives within an ecosystem. So from there the chapter focuses on the hierarchical taxonomy system, um, which was originally developed to separate animals or to categorize different species within a genus. And there are many levels in the current hierarchal taxonomy system. There are eight different levels, um, which I don't remember. And then from there the chapter looked at the difference between basic science and applied science, um, seeing this idea of basic science as spreading a more general knowledge of science throughout the world without really having any end game or short term/long term purpose around the application whereas applied science is much more focused, um, on solving real world problems through the use of scientific method and scientific knowledge. The article talked about the debate that some feel like basic science is fairly useless. Um, the counter to that is that basic science knowledge is a prerequisite for applied science knowledge to be effective.

The essay read was divided into two parts, both themed around the ethics of public speaking and communication. The first part looked at the pyramid, um, of what makes up ethical - or what consider - what facets of public speaking need to be looked at, um, in terms of ethics, the first part being the intent, the second part being the means, the last part being the ends. When looking at, um, intent it's important to crowd source and make sure that, um, your personal conceptions of what is ethical line up with the more popular conceptions. The second part is looking at the means and that's just saying there's different ways to achieve the same end but some ways of achieving them are less ethical than others and again it's important to go off an established idea of what is ethical in that regard. The third part is the ends and it is important to note that the ends may be ethical for the source and not for the receiver or the other way around [INAUDIBLE]. And looking at considering, again, drawing of popular conceptions or previously defined codes of ethic to ensure that there are ethical outcomes for both source and receiver. The second part of the essay was around the NCA code, creed, um, what have you, ideas of ethical communication. Um, it was divided into general themes. One of those themes is about being honest and accurate in what one is communicating. Um, another is around being transparent about where the information is coming from in terms of bias and source credibility. Another one in regards to sourcing, looking at, um, avoiding plagiarism so making sure to cite where the information is coming from to the audience. Um, on top of that it's important to create a caring environment, one in which the speaker is both working to understand the audience and care about the audience in relation to what they are saying. The other is being open to dissent and opposing points of view and trying to really understand other opinions objectively. Um, on top of that, it - oh, they talked about using communication in the pursuit of social justice and addressing inequalities and taking responsibility for both the short term and long term outcomes of one's communication.

OK, so the chapter was about biology and, um, biological organisms. And it talked about the eight different levels of, um, organisms and what they need to survive in their environment. And then it talked about the scale so from like cells all the way to an ecosystem. And then it talked about writing the names, like the scientific name based on like the family and origin and classification, things like that. And then it talked about two different types of science and research kind of biology where one is the basic, which is just researching for no purpose other than to observe things and the other one is looking at like solving a specific problem or answering a specific question, like finding the cure for cancer.

OK, I read about the development of agriculture and kind of the history of how it developed and the different theories for why we transitioned into that type of society. So it kind of started with talking about the initial theories, which were saying that it was separation from nature and that the hunter gatherers were more barbaric and that it was a progression, an advancement, to move to the agriculture and move away from the hunter gathering method of getting food. And then it talked about how more recent theories contradict that and say that those initial - I think it was Child or Chilled and someone else, their initial theories weren't as likely or they didn't agree with them. So now the newer theories are saying that it wasn't really a separation from nature and it wasn't that, um, the hunter gatherers were more barbaric and some of them were even saying that the hunter gatherers had actually - didn't have to expend more energy or had more food at times than the people who started the agriculture - doing agriculture did. So, um, yeah, they don't know exactly why we switched. There are theories that there was an increase in population and a need to kind of make a community and domesticate plants and animals in order to survive. And there are other theories that it was the climate change that required that and, yeah, still don't have an exact theory today. We're just kind of going through the different ones.

OK, so the chapter was about, um, ethics and public speaking and it was talking about the ethics pyramid, which had intent, means, and ends. And then it also had the NAD, NAC six like guidelines that speakers to follow to not manipulate their listeners, to give credit to outside sources, like what the APA format would be and to not lie basically, not manipulate them [INAUDIBLE]. And yeah, provide false information or cause them to feel a certain way or act a certain way that you didn't intend. so you have to be, um, aware of what your intentions are what that could possibly do to the listeners if you are trying to get a message across.

OK, the chapter was on social psychology and it was talking about the different aspects that make up social psychology so there's, um, social cognition, which is being aware of other people and when to act in certain situations, which is cognition in general. And then, um, there's social affect, affect with affect that's like your mood and your emotions and kind of how you're presenting and your mood and emotions and general affect can influence how you interact with other people. Like if you're in a good mood you'll want to talk to them and if you're in a bad mood you might be more hostile or snap or shy away from human interaction. And then there's social behavior and so let's see, I think it was called - I still can't remember. But it's talking about if you get sick or need something then you expect other people to take care of you and there's like social rewards and benefits that you get from other people if you're participating in a certain way. So there's kind of like social exchanges so if you provide someone something then you get something back. And then it was also talking about like how certain schemas and things like that influence our behavior and we develop these like just kind of stereotypes and schemas to not have to think as quick - like as much about people and quickly make decisions kind of based on things that you've already formed. And that like social norms and like the rule and things like that are really ingrained in you. So I thought the example was interesting because I totally do this. If you're in the middle of the desert and there's no one around you, you still stop at a stop sign because it's - you're just trained to follow the rules and so it'd feel wrong to not stop even though it wouldn't matter.

OK, so what I read about was, uh, the diversity of life and science. Um, it talked a lot about cells, um, and the different types of cells and molecules and how atoms make up molecules. Um, and then there's a bunch of different cells like prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Um, Carl Linnaeus and the binomial nomenclature, um, and then the different types of science were, um, basic and applied science.

OK, so what I read was about agriculture and how there was a couple guys for it and then there was one guy against it. Um, and it talked about the history of agriculture and, um, how it's either good for nature or bad for nature depending on what kind of view you have.

OK, what I read about was ethics in public speaking. Um, uh, there was three different aspects, uh, intent, means, and ends. Um, when you are giving a speech, it's important to ask yourself if it follows a code of ethics and, um, make sure you don't plagiarize because that's bad. And, mm, people tend to listen to, um, uh, speakers on social injustices.

Uh, what I read about was how social interactions can affect, uh, people's behavior. Um, and, um, there's lots of vocab words. Um, social - social norms, um, cultures and stuff like that is all stuff that can affect, um, people's behavior. Um, cultures, um, or cults can have a really big influence on people's decision making. Um, and, um, there's, um, emotions and behavior, which are different because emotion is short, um, more specific stimulus that elicits the arousal of behavior. Um, and then, um, reciprocal, um, altruism, which is getting something back for doing something good in society.

So, uh, there were kind of three main sections. So it started out with like characteristics of living things like ability to adapt, homeostasis, uh, regeneration, stuff like that. And then it went into, uh, order like classifying organisms so like genus, uh, species, kingdom, stuff like that. And, uh, from there it went on to basic versus applied science and basic science was just kind of like just to know stuff but it's not really applicable to real life. And then applied science was just you can apply it to real world problems and situations and kind of how basic science helps with applied science.

So it was about agriculture, um, kind of defines agriculture, which wasn't super important. And then it goes into theories about agriculture with certain people's, uh, like theories about it. Uh, one is named Martin and Childs so you have to like kind of distinguish their theories. And then it goes into like possible explanations about like the reasons we have agriculture. And then kind of into like some of them are about the impact it has on nature, whatnot. And then it goes into some more like people's opinions and stuff about it, which were kind of briefly talked about. They weren't really in depth as much as the other people's like opinions about it. And then it goes into some definitions, like communication and technology and agriculture, I think was the other definition. So you just kind of have to know those. And then again it gives you a summary at the end, which is kind of the most important to read because it's pretty dense with all the information you need, I guess, so.

So the chapter was about the ethics - well, it was about public speaking ethics so it started with the ethics pyramid, which, um, is intent, means, and ends. And then it went into the ethics about public speaking, which is just kind of like cite sources, um, communication, um, partly being a good listener, not judging your speaker before and, uh, as a speaker giving all potential counter arguments so your audience isn't coming up with arguments as you're speaking and then not listening to you. Um, freedom of expression was one. It talks about like social, like, justice. I mean, that's just some of it. It's a lot of topics covered briefly, so.

So it started out talking about social influence and how it affects social norms and how different geographical regions have different social norms with like maybe personal space or whatnot, just an example. Um, and then it talked about the ABCs, which was affect, uh, behavior, and cognition. Um, and then after that there wasn't much related to - they didn't really relate it back to that a whole lot. And then it went to, uh, your perception of like yourself, like your moods versus emotions. Moods are like kind of an every - prolonged everyday thing. Emotions are a short instant snapshot of like an extreme thing. Uh, and then influence or like your perception of other people, which was based on, uh, schemas and attitudes so schemas just kind of like, uh, you'd like - like kind of like a description of someone like oh, they're a nice person or an attitude would be like I like them or I don't like them. And then after that there was kind of a main point of reciprocal altruism and kind of like you do something for someone and then they would be expected to do it back. But that whole idea is like applied to a entire society.

This reading was, uh, from a basic chapter of biology and it talked about the different, um, aspects we use to describe living things and, um, just kind of how that works as far as their like adaptations, how they reproduce and, um, homeostasis and just those kind of, um, factors that enable an organism to, um, to function and live. And it also talked about the three different domains of life: bacteria, archea,  and eukarya. And how eukaryotic organisms or cells have a - are more complex and they have membrane bound organelles, which basically do, um, they're basically the processing system of the cell. And then they have - you have bacteria which are single celled organisms that aren't as complex and there are also viruses which don't even have, um, the machinery they need to reproduce and um, metabolize so they have to infect a host cell. And they also had archea which I believe are bacteria that live in extreme environments such as, you know, burning hot - I don't even know what you'd call them, like really hot areas in the bottom of the ocean or whatever. And then it also talked about how you classify organisms in, um, you know, genus, species, um, kingdom, order, phylum, that kind of stuff and the hierarchy of it. And it also talked about how, um, uh, we - there's this, um, binomial nomenclature kind of thing which is where you assign two names to an organism and the first name is in all caps and the second is in lower case letters. And the first one is, um, the genus and the second one is the species, I believe. I could be wrong about the genus one though. And, um, and then it later talked about, um, applied science versus - I forget - I think I kept calling it hard sign but I don't know if it's like environmental science or just observational science. I don't know what it's called. But basically biology, chemistry, that kind of stuff where you just, um, glean knowledge is for knowledge sake. And then it also talked about applied science, which, um, I don't remember the examples it gave but I generally think of more physics and engineering and that kind of stuff, like the sciences that actually, um, work to solve a problem. And how a lot of people think that the hard science area, um, is basically useless because you're not really accomplishing any sort of task or solving any problem. And that we should be focusing more on solving problems but it's interesting because if you don't have the knowledge that is gained from the experiments, you don't really have tools to solve problems. So in the case of DNA, they talked about how, um, you know, before they even knew of DNA and knew of that they, you know, obviously studied it and figured out that it has some sort of, um, hereditary aspect to it in the sense that individuals that are related to you have similar DNA patterns. And so they used that knowledge for paternity tests and they also used them for identifying individuals that were in a specific crime room or crime scene. And so basically the chapter, the beginning talked about just the different aspects of life and, um, survival. And then the second part talked about, um, just the, um, hierarchy of the - of living things and how they're organized. And then the last part talked about the differences of, um, applied sciences to the more like hard study in sciences.

This chapter discussed agriculture and, um, how it's changed throughout history starting with a more prehistoric forms of agriculture like hunter and gatherer and it even divided those up into two sections, one that, um, one that had that gathered and hunted more scarce resources so their populations were smaller because of competition. And then other hunter and gatherer societies that hunted more, um, like [INAUDIBLE] that had bigger populations like fish that weren't as scarce of resources and so they had, um, they were able to get a bigger population. And then they were also discussing different theories about how, um, you know, humans interact with the natural world, plants and animals, and, um, how there's kind of this dominant theory and domestication whereas there's also a theory from Child - well the first one was Morgan and the second one is Child. And that one, um, talked more about the symbiotic relationships and, uh, kind of the improvements we've made working with environment instead of being dominant over it. And then it described symbiotic relationships as, um, they give the example of ant and trees about how both organisms evolved to work together and to support each other and, um, help in the survival of each species.  And then it later discussed, um, tools and, um, just how agriculture has grown into the modern, um, society, and how tools allow us to produce more than we've ever been able to produce. And some theorists argue that because of the increased population we were essentially forced to produce more food whereas other people think that because of increased technology and the ability to produce more food, population has increased. So there - there are those two viewpoints and, um, yeah, just basically discussed the different perspectives of agriculture and also the history of it and how it's changed over time, um, with, you know, the different theorists. That's basically what I remember.

The reading was, um, what looked like the introductory textbook of communication and, um, and speeches. And, um, it talked about the different, the pyramid and the different ways to, um, or the different aspects of public speaking. One was the means, one was end, and one was intentionality. And the textbook argued that you have to be intentional when you communicate and you have to be aware of potential consequences of the things you say and to be aware of, um, different actions that people will take depending on, you know, what you tell them to do. So just be conscious of, you know, what your message could, um, inspire in your listeners. And also, um, it discussed means, which talked about the way you get to achieve your goal. And, um, it talked about positive and negative means, positive being, um, the person whose doing something for you like editing your paper gets something out of it and they feel good about doing it such as you telling them that you would edit your paper if they edited yours so that's kind of a win-win situation whereas you could have bad means such as blackmail and that person obviously wouldn't feel as good as, um, they would have by editing your paper. And it also talked about your end, which is basically your goal and, um, and then the means is how you get to the end. And it also talked about plagiarism also, which I didn't mention the first time. And it talked about how during public - during public speaking you should cite your sources and air quotes aren't really recommended because you have to verbally say where you got your information from and just give credit to that person or organization. And, um, let's see, what else. Yeah, I think that was basically it. It was just talking about ethics and, um, and they have different, um, organizations or I think it was called like a - not a bureau but something similar to that, that basically outlined different ethics. And they have, I think, a crest even. Maybe I'm getting that wrong but if you're unsure if an action or what you're saying is ethical, you can refer to those sources. And um, yeah, just be a good consumer of media and be a good producer of it, I guess.

This chapter was about psychology and, um, it had to do with different elements of, um, social interaction and it talked about your own emotions and attitudes towards things and, um, and it also talked about, um, how you have kind of like your social support group, I guess, which would be, um, your family and friends and just people that you hang around most often. And then it kind of built off of that and talked about, um, you know, social influence and how different people can influence what you think and what you believe and your attitudes toward things - towards things. And then, um, it also talked about, um, just kind of personality versus behaviorism and how, um, most often, um, sociologists or psychologists look at behavior because, um, they gave the case of, um, cult suicide and how, uh, it was basically based off of their behaviorism and following directions and that sort of like sense of community than it was their personality. So I mean anyone can be involved in that. It doesn't take like a specific personality necessarily.  But, um, it also talked about, um, like positive outcomes of, um, interaction with people and negative outcomes. And, um, and it also discussed the three categories, ABC and B is behaviorism, C is cognition, and I think A was, I don't know, it was a word that I thought was totally unrelated. But, um, and it talked about, um, I'm totally losing my words now, how that's basically the basis of social communication. And it also talked about, um, this other term I can't remember. And that was about how, um, you have give and take relationships with people. And if you do something for somebody it's not necessarily out of the goodness of your heart but because you want people to do what - you want to do to people what you want them to do to you. So they feel like there's like a reciprocal relationship there so that the person that they're helping out will then help them out when they need it. And, um, if people don't do that they're really negatively looked at. And, um, you know, they're kind of like cheaters of the system. And so it also talked about culture and, um, and just how your attitudes and beliefs just kind of really define who you are in your culture and how you're probably a product of the social norms of the culture you're in and that's why you behave the way you do.

There are eight characteristics of living things. Um, viruses are not living things. Uh, living things are categorized in a hierarchy, um, and organized by characteristics that make them similar.

Archaeologists historically believe that, um, the evolution of agriculture from hunting and gathering was associated with, um, progress and movement towards more advanced human society. However, um, archaeologists currently believe that that transition is not associated with progress and now seek to find, uh, the source for that transition.

There are three things on a pyramid of ethics: intent, means, and ends. And they should all be in balance. And the chapter focused on assessing those things in terms of public speaking.

Social psychology is the study of, um, the relationship between individuals and the people around them. And it includes affect, behavior, and cognition.