Perspectives on Agriculture
Learning objectives

1. Understand the ideas of Lewis Henry Morgan and V. Gordon Childe about the origin of agriculture.

2. Explain the challenge to these ideas posed in the writing of David Rindos, Tim Ingold, and Marshall Sahlins.

3. Describe alternate theories / explanations to origin of agriculture 


Definitions of Agriculture

Almost the entire evolutionary history of genus Horno has taken place within a hunting-and-gathering context. It was only 15,000 years ago that societies of modern humans in different areas of the world began to shift to an agricultural way of life. The transition from hunter-gatherer societies to agricultural societies is one of the most profound and significant events in prehistory. Early anthropologists and archaeologists saw the development of agriculture as the natural result of an inherent human tendency to move toward more advanced ways of life. Today, most archaeologists reject both the association between agriculture and progress and the use of progress to explain changes in prehistory. We are left with the challenge of discovering the diverse pathways that societies around the world took toward agriculture and what caused those societies to change. 


Early Perspectives

The pioneering American anthropologist Lewis Henry Morgan wrote that, through the invention of agriculture, humans placed themselves outside of the world of nature and moved toward "human supremacy on the earth" (Rindos 1984, 9). In his book Ancient Society, published in 1877, Morgan labeled the transition to agriculture as the shift from a period of "savagery" to one of "barbarism." Among the defining aspects of barbarism, he included the invention of pottery, the domestication of animals and plants, and the construction of buildings out of mud brick. In his writing on barbarism, Morgan emphasized that the transition to agriculture was a stage in the progress of humanity. 


In the 1940s, V. Gordon Childe synthesized the existing archaeological information to reformulate Morgan's ideas about the origin of agriculture. He coined the term the Neolithic Revolution. For Childe, the most important result of the Neolithic Revolution was the ability to actively control food production. This led to an increase in the food supply, which in turn supported an increase in population, resulting in the development of settled villages. 


The concepts developed by Morgan and Childe remain essential to the study of prehistory. Few archaeologists question the revolutionary effects the development of agriculture had on human society, and understanding the Neolithic Revolution remains central to the study of prehistory. However, although Morgan's and Childe's contributions are widely recognized, most of their specific ideas about the nature of the shift to agriculture are the subject of debate and criticism. 


Humanity and Nature in the Shift to Agriculture

Both Morgan and Childe viewed the development of agriculture as a shift in the relationship between humanity and the natural world. Morgan believed that "barbaric" society had set itself in a position of supremacy above nature. Childe saw Neolithic societies as "active partners with nature" rather than "parasites on nature." Both Childe and Morgan seem to imply that humans consciously removed themselves from nature by inventing agriculture. Today, such a concept is contested by archaeologists and anthropologists working from a wide range of perspectives. 


For David Rindos, the development of agriculture was a co-evolutionary process involving a symbiotic relationship between plant and animal species in which each species contributes to the other's support. Symbiotic relationships with plants and animals are not unique to humans, and are widespread in the natural world. For example, there is a symbiotic relationship between ants and acacia trees. The ants live in the acacias, harvesting the trees' sugars and leaves while feeding on insects that would otherwise destroy the trees. If the ants are removed, other insects attack the trees and which then rapidly die. The relationship is a symbiotic one in which the ants receive nutrients and shelter and the acacias receive protection from harmful insects. Rindos argued that the domestication of plants by humans was a similar co-evolutionary process. Rindos' view on the origins of agriculture was based on biological theory. 


Working from a different perspective, anthropologist Tim Ingold (2000) has also argued against agriculture as the removal of humans from nature. Ingold begins by looking at the way modern hunter-gatherer societies see the world. He finds that these people do not make the kinds of distinctions between the natural and human worlds that are so critical to Childe and Morgan's account. Ingold sees the domestication of animals as a shift from a world where relationships are based on trust to one where they are based on domination. The relationship between hunter-gatherers and animals is based on trust in a powerful natural world that will provide for people in return for human respect and propitiation. Social relations between humans are made on the same basis of trust, because there is no essential distinction between the human and animal worlds. 


For Ingold, the shift from hunting to agriculture involves a move from trust to domination that pervades all aspects of human life.. Animals no longer protect themselves; instead, the herdsman makes life-and-death decisions about them. Similar concepts of domination and control pervade the social life of humans with the development of owned property and social hierarchy. But Ingold stresses that the shift from trust to domination does not involve a separation of humanity from nature as envisioned by Morgan and Childe. Rather, the development of agriculture involves a "change in the terms of engagement." Not until the recent development of industrialized agriculture did animals become merely objects of human control. 


Agriculture and Progress

Today it is quite jarring to read Morgan and Childe describe hunter-gatherer societies as savages. The term clearly embodies a value judgment, as does the term barbaric for farming societies. Both characterizations are repugnant to contemporary anthropologists, who see them as dehumanizing. Moreover, the entire notion of linking the transition to farming to the idea of progress has become extremely problematic. In a clever turn of phrase, anthropologist Marshall Sahlins (1972) has called hunter-gatherers the "original affluent society." Through a careful comparison of ethnographic studies of hunter-gatherer and farming communities, Sahlins has shown that, contrary to our expectations, hunter-gatherers spend less time working for their food than agriculturalists. Hunter-gatherers actually have far more leisure time than farmers. on the basis of a study of human skeletal remains from prehistoric sites, Marc Cohen (1977) has demonstrated that early agriculturalists were not as healthy as hunter-gatherers. Because of increased crowding in permanent villages, agricultural societies were vulnerable to outbreaks of disease. Also, their health suffered from a decrease in the quality of their diet. As a result of studies such as these, many archaeologists question whether the development of agriculture was the result of people choosing or inventing a "better" way of life. 


Searching for Explanations

Central to the study of agricultural origins is the recognition that plants and animals have been domesticated independently in numerous locations. The major centers for the independent domestication of indigenous plants and animals were the Middle East, south China, north China, Africa, the Andes, and central Mexico. Other regions where there was limited independent domestication of plants include eastern North America and New Guinea. Because agriculture developed independently in at least six regions, archaeologists can explore whether there were regularities in its unfolding. 


Archaeologists make a distinction between areas where agriculture developed independently and areas into which agriculture spread. The spread of agriculture is increasingly recognized as a process that is as complex and worthy of study as the original domestication of plants and animals. The origin of agriculture is a complex topic that involves both empirical and theoretical components. The essential theoretical issue that faces archaeologists is how to approach the origins of agriculture as a process. 


One approach to this question has been to look for an external trigger that played a role in the shift to agriculture. One obvious candidate for such a trigger is climate change. Another factor that might have triggered the shift to agriculture is an increase in population. Research by Ester Boserup suggests that population growth might actually be an underlying cause, rather than an effect, of agriculture. Boserup's (1965) studies suggest that subsistence systems-the ways people get their food-tend to be the result of population pressures. 


A major breakthrough in the study of agricultural origins has been the recognition that it is unlikely that searching for a single external trigger will produce a satisfying explanation. Following an approach based on systems theory, archaeologists have shifted to developing models of how the interaction between a number of factors might have led to the adoption of agriculture (Bender 1975). A particularly intriguing model developed by Brian Hayden focuses on the interaction between surplus food and social organization. Hayden begins by arguing that not all hunter-gatherer societies are the same. Generalized hunter-gatherers rely on scarce or unpredictable resources and, as a result, live at low population densities. In such societies, competition over food resources will be detrimental to the group and therefore maladaptive. Complex hunter-gatherers use more reliable and abundant resources (such as salmon, cod, insects, rodents, grass seeds, and nuts) and therefore can live at higher population densities. Because overexploitation of these resources is practically impossible, competition can develop and will largely take the form of feasting events. It is the" competition between individuals using food resources to wage their competitive battles," says Hayden that "provides the motive and the means for the development of food production .... Aspiring accumulators can be expected to exert all their ingenuity to bribe, coerce, cajole, and con other members of the community into supporting competitive feasts and producing as many delicacies or other high-quality foods as possible for feasts" (Hayden 1990, 35-36). 


An interesting aspect of Hayden's model is that it builds on changes in hunter-gatherer adaptations, which then interact with social factors to push societies toward agriculture. Such societies of hunter-gatherers are often labeled "Archaic" in the Americas and "Epipaleolithic" or "Mesolithic" in other parts of the world. Kent Flannery has emphasized that a common characteristic of these societies is that they relied on a broad spectrum adaptation that included a wide range of plant and animal foods. (Flannery 1973). 


There is considerable variation in the pathways different societies took in adopting farming. Agriculture can be viewed as a broad phenomenon that can be broken into three components. 


1. Domestication. A relationship between humans, on the one hand, and plants and animals, on the other. 


2. Technology. The tools used for daily tasks. 


3. Community. The development of a constructed landscape. 


Domestication refers to a relationship between humans, plants, and animals in which the humans play an integral role in the protection and reproduction of the plant or animal species. As Rindos (1984) makes clear, domestication is not necessarily the result of conscious manipulation of plants and animals by humans. Archaeologically, a plant or animal is identified as domestic based on changes in the shape or size (morphology) of its remains, compared with the morphology of the wild ancestors (progenitors) of the same plants or animals. Plants or animals are also identified as domesticated when they are found outside their expected geographic distribution. With animals, domestication can sometimes be identified on the basis of the ratio of the sexes of an animal by age. Generally, an overrepresentation of young male animals is indicative of domestication. 


Technology refers to the tools used for daily tasks, including farming, food processing, and food storage. Among the technological innovations that are often linked to agriculture are pottery, ground stone axes, and sickles. 


Community refers to more than just physical changes to the landscape through the construction of villages. The community aspect of agricultural origins also refers to a change in the way people view the landscape and the way ownership of the land is conceived. Agriculture involves important shifts in social organization, leadership, and the relationship between kin groups and property. The shift to agricultural society also had significant effects on cosmology-the way people saw themselves in relation to supernatural forces. 


Agriculture and Progress Revisited

Progress has been rejected as an explanation for why agricultural societies came into being; however, there does seem to be an element of progress, or at least directionality, built into our conception of the origins of agriculture as a process. For example, Hayden (1990) discusses a shift from generalized hunter-gatherers, to complex hunter-gatherers, to farmers. The directionality inherent in the shift to agriculture poses a significant theoretical challenge. A similar challenge plagues evolutionary biologists struggling to explain how evolution can have direction without recourse to models that view progress as explaining evolution (Nitecki 1988). Several concepts from evolutionary biology are useful to our study of agricultural origins. The first is that directionality and progress are distinct. Stephen jay Gould (1988) has argued that directionality is the essential element of any historical process. Notably, Gould states that "history must be more than a string of isolated, if distinctive, events strung together one after the other" (Gould 1988, 333). The essence of historical processes is that they unfold in time. 


Agriculture came into being because of the actions of people, and the changes unleashed by the process shook the foundations of the world in which those people lived. The shift from hunter-gatherer societies profoundly affected every aspect of human life, from the diversity of the ecosystem to the way people experienced the supernatural. The origins of agriculture point to the essential link between aspects of experience we often treat as distinct. Social change, technological innovation, ecological impact, and religious experience are all inextricably linked in a process that produced a truly revolutionary change in human societies. 